h1. Circumnavigation
The Flat Earth is laid out like a North-Azimuthal projection.

The North Pole is at the center while Antarctica is at the rim. The continents are spread out around the North Pole.

Circumnavigation on a Flat Earth is achieved because on a compass East and West are always at right angles to North. Traveling Eastwards continuously takes you in a circle around the North Pole. East and West are curved.


"North is Hubwards, South is Rimwards, East is Turnwise, and West is Widdershins"


As it happens, except at the equator, on a Round Earth you do not travel perfectly straight when traveling East or West either. Consider this thought experiment:

You are on a Round Earth standing 10 feet away from the North Pole. You are then directed to travel East and are instructed to continue to do so. What happens to your path? You end up traveling in a circle, and not in a straight line that you previously thought you would.

The exact same thing happens regardless of where are you on the Flat Earth. Your path will not be straight without you having to constantly change the direction you are traveling in reference to a compass.

Traveling in a Straight Line
Q. Can't we just circumnavigate the earth by traveling in a straight line without a navigational aid?

A. It is not possible to travel in a perfectly straight line for very long without a navigational aid.

It's not even possible to drive down a long length of highway without turning the steering wheel left or right. Get in a car and see if you can drive down a long stretch of highway without turning the wheel left or right. It's a near impossible thing to do. And when it comes to planes, ships, helicopters, et all., no craft has the ability of traveling in a perfectly straight line without the operator adjusting the craft with regards to visual terrain, compass readings, or what have you.

When one navigates, hands on control is paramount. You wouldn't find a ship captain in New York pointing his vessel in the direction of London, turning on cruise control, and then taking a three week nap in the lower decks. Who knows where he'd end up.

Q. What about other types of navigational instruments?

A. Using a compass, gyrocompass, or looking at Polaris as a reference for Eastwards or Westwards travel will take the navigator in a broad circle around the North Pole.

h1. Undersea Cables
Q. If a cable company put down a cable its length would have to be longer than predicted (by round earth geometry) if the world were flat. If somebody put down a bunch of cables and found that they were longer than they'd expected, wouldn't they tell somebody?

A. But the cables are always longer than expected. It's just explained by underwater currents, soil irregularity, winds and errors in placement, et cetera. And somewhere in that is lost a mistake caused by a slight misunderstanding of the Earth's shape.

The Transatlantic Cable

In the book "The Laying of the Cable" by John Mullaly we read journal entries showing that segments between various points on the supposed globular earth required surplus cable.

In the following entry 16% surplus cable is reported:

"Total amount of cable paid out, 949 miles 660 fathoms; total amount run by observation, 818 miles; total amount run by patent log, 802 4-10 miles; total amount run by ship's log, 810 1/4 miles; total amount run by engineer's log, 815 1/3 miles. Surplus cable paid out over distance run by observation, 131 miles 660 fathoms, about 16 percent.; 64 miles from the Telegraph House. Received signal from Agamemnon at noon that they had paid out from her 940 miles of cable. Passed this morning several icebergs. Made the land off entrance to Trinity Bay at 8 P.M. Entered Trinity Bay at 12 30 P.M. At 2 30 P.M. stopped sending signals to Agamemnon for 14 minutes, for the purpose of making splice.
—"The Laying of the Cable," John Mullaly

Another segment of the cable laying showed a 15% surplus:

"Thursday, August 5.—At 145 A. M., Niagara anchored. Distance run since noon yesterday, 64 miles; amount of cable paid out, 66 miles 382 fathoms, being a loss of less than 4 per cent. Total amount of cable payed out since splice was made, 1,016 miles 600 fathoms. Total amount of distance, 882 miles. Amount of cable paid out over distance run, 134 miles 600 fathoms, being a surplus of about 15 percent. At 2 A. M. I went ashore in a small boat, and awoke persons in charge of the Telegraph House, half a mile from landing, and informed them that the Telegraph fleet had arrived, and were ready to land the end of the cable. At 2 45 received signal from the Agamemnon that she had paid out 1,010 miles cable.
—"The Laying of the Cable," John Mullaly

Additional quotes similar to the ones above may be found in the work as well.

h1. Railroads

The early Zetetic movement occurred in tandem with the "Golden Age of Railroads," in which hundreds of thousands of miles of railroad were laid worldwide from the early 1800's to the early 1900's. During this time there was lively discussion on how railroads, often over hundreds of miles, are always assembled, cut, measured, and laid out horizontally level without the mathematical calculation or allowance for any curvature.

  “ The London and Northwestern Railway forms a straight line 180 miles long between London and Liverpool. The railroad’s highest point, midway at Birmingham station, is only 240 feet above sea-level. If the world were actually a globe, however, curveting 8 inches per mile squared, the 180 mile stretch of rail would form an arc with the center point at Birmingham raising a full 5,400 feet above London and Liverpool. Adding the station’s actual height (240 feet) to its theoretical inclination (5,400 feet) gives 5,640 feet as the rail’s necessary height on a globe-Earth, more than a thousand feet taller than Ben Nevis, the tallest mountain in Great Britain! ”
                  —David Wardlaw Scott, Terra Firma (1901)


Zetetic Cosmogony

Zetetic Cosmogony (1899)
by Thomas Winship
Full Text Link

p.23

  “ Let those who believe it is the practice for surveyors to make allowance for ‘curvature’ ponder over the following from the Manchester Ship Canal Company (Earth Review, October, 1893) "It is customary in Railway and Canal constructions for all levels to be referred to a datum which is nominally horizontal and is so shown on all sections. It is not the practice in laying out Public Works to make allowances for the curvature of the earth." ”

p.107

  “ In projecting railways on a globe, the datum line would be the arc of a circle corresponding to the latitude of the place. That the datum line for the railway projections is always a horizontal line, proves that the general configuration of the world is horizontal. To support the globe theory, the gentlemen of the observatories should call upon the surveyor to prove that he allows the necessary amount for ‘curvature.’ But this is what the learned men dare not do, as it is well-known that the allowance for the supposed curvature is never made. ”

p.109

  “ One hundred and eighteen miles of LEVEL railway, and yet the surface on which it is projected a globe? Impossible. It cannot be. Early in 1898 I met Mr. Hughes, chief officer of the steamer ‘City of Lincoln.’ This gentleman told me he had projected thousands of miles of level railway in South America, and never heard of any allowance for curvature being made. On one occasion he surveyed over one thousand miles of railway which was a perfect straight line all the way. ”

  “ It is well known that in the Argentine Republic and other parts of South America, there are railways thousands of miles long without curve or gradient. In projecting railways, the world is acknowledged to be a plane, and if it were a globe the rules of projection have yet to be discovered. Level railways prove a level world, to the utter confusion of the globular school of impractical men with high salaries and little brains. ”

p.126

  “ That in all surveys no allowance is made for curvature, which would be a necessity on a globe; that a horizontal line is in every case the datum line, the same line being continuous throughout the whole length of the work; and that the theodolite cuts a line at equal altitudes on either side of it, which altitude is the same as that of the instrument, clearly proves, to those who will accept proof when it is furnished, that the world is a plane and not a globe. ”

Earth Review

One surveyor, Mr. T. Westwood, wrote into the January, 1896 “Earth Review” magazine stating that, “In leveling, I work from Ordinance marks, or canal levels, to get the height above sea level. The puzzle to me used to be, that over several miles each level was and is treated throughout its whole length as the same level from end to end; not the least allowance being made for curvature. One of the civil engineers in this district, after some amount of argument on each side as to the reason why no allowance for curvature was made, said he did not believe anybody would know the shape of the earth in this life.”

Engineer, W. Winckler, wrote into the Earth Review October 1893 regarding the Earth’s supposed curvature, stating, “As an engineer of many years standing, I saw that this absurd allowance is only permitted in school books. No engineer would dream of allowing anything of the kind. I have projected many miles of railways and many more of canals and the allowance has not even been thought of, much less allowed for. This allowance for curvature means this - that it is 8” for the first mile of a canal, and increasing at the ratio by the square of the distance in miles; thus a small navigable canal for boats, say 30 miles long, will have, by the above rule an allowance for curvature of 600 feet. Think of that and then please credit engineers as not being quite such fools. Nothing of the sort is allowed. We no more think of allowing 600 feet for a line of 30 miles of railway or canal, than of wasting our time trying to square the circle.”

George Walter Winckler
W. Winckler is believed to be George Walter Winckler, a civil engineer who migrated from England to Canada. In Chapter 4 of The Plane Truth: A History of the Flat-Eart Movement by Robert J. Schadewald he cites that Winckler was associated with M.I.C.E (Member, Institute of Civil Engineers.). A "G. W. Winckler" was also listed as a member of Lady Blount's Universal Zetetic Society on the first few pages of Flat or Spherical? (1905).

Note: In prior eras the usage of the middle name as the first name was not uncommon.

The Sun

The Sun is a sphere which revolves above the Earth on a path known as the ecliptic. Its path moves North-South over the year between the Tropic of Capricorn to the Tropic of Cancer. It illuminates a portion of the earth at a time and has daily cycle of one revolution per 24 hours.

The Moon

The Moon is a sphere which revolves above the surface of the Earth in a manner similar to the Sun. It moves at a slower rate of revolution, at about 347.81° per 24 hours, rising and setting 50 minutes later each day. The Moon has a monthly phase cycle, ranging from New Moon to Full Moon.

The Planets

The planets are bodies which move above the face of the Earth and across the sky with apparent relationship to the Sun. Known to antequity as 'wandering stars', the planets were once thought to be key to the nature of the Solar System and the Earth's place in it.

The Stars

The stars are luminous elements which move in a layer above the Sun and Moon at a rate slightly slower than the Sun, resulting in the Sun moving along zodiac constellations throughout the year.

A Note On Sphericity

It is sometimes asked that if the visible celestial bodies are spheres, why isn't the Earth a sphere? The logic that the Earth must be a sphere because the celestial bodies that we see are spheres is only one possible interpretation. It could also be logical that all bodies need a plane of existence to exist upon or over, like all other bodies of human experience. Pebbles in a stream have a stream bed. Basketballs have a basketball court. The game Water Polo consists of a court with a flat bottom and balls which float on a medium. It does not follow because those objects are round, that the courts must also be round.

Universal Acceleration

Universal Acceleration (UA) is a theory of gravitation which posits that the Flat Earth is accelerating upwards at a constant rate of 9.8 m/s². This acceleration creates the effects of gravity as we experience it on the surface of the Earth. Objects fall towards the Earth because the Earth is accelerating upwards to meet them.

The Basics

According to Flat Earth Theory, gravity is not the main force keeping us on the ground. Instead, there is a force that produces identical effects as observed from the surface of the earth. This force is known as "Universal Acceleration" (abbreviated as UA).

Objects on the earth's surface have weight because all sufficiently massive celestial bodies are accelerating upward at the rate of 9.8 m/s^2 relative to a local observer immediately above said body. The mass of the earth is thought to shield the objects atop it from the direct force of UA. Alternatively, it is possible that the force of UA can actually pass through objects, but its effect on smaller bodies is negligible (similar to gravity in RET cosmology, which only has a noticeable affect on very large objects).

However, not all Flat Earth models dismiss the theory of gravity. The Davis Model proposes that the earth is an infinite plane exerting a finite gravitational pull (g), which is consistent with Gauss's Law.
    
Equivalence Principle


The Equivalence Principle
The phenomenon we observe everyday when falling is currently substantiated in modern physics by what is called the Equivalence Principle.

This principle in physics states that in a relative frame of reference, it is not possible to locally discern whether the frame is accelerating upwards, or if the object inside the frame is affected by gravity.

Several frequently asked questions are, "How is that I can jump and then come back down?" and "Why is it that I feel as though I'm being pulled toward the earth?"

Since the Earth is pushing you upwards, you are moving at the same speed as the Earth, much like when you are sitting in a car, the car is pushing you along. When you jump, your upward velocity is for a moment, greater than the Earth's so you rise above it. But after a few moments, the Earth's increasing velocity due to its acceleration eventually catches up.

Accelerating to the Speed of Light

It is a common misconception that if we were to continuously accelerate over time, we would eventually be moving faster than the speed of light. This is of course, incorrect as nothing with mass may do so.

According to the Special theory of Relativity, the Earth can accelerate forever without reaching or passing the speed of light. Relative to an observer on Earth (more specifically, an observer who recently left the Earth, e.g. a person who jumped up), the Earth's acceleration will always be 1g. Relative to an inertial observer in the universe, however, the Earth's acceleration decreases as the its velocity approaches c. It all depends on our frame of reference to measure and explain the Earth's motion. Thus, despite what most people think, there is no absolute "speed" or velocity of the Earth.

A brief explanation of special relativity
Special relativity (SR) (also known as the special theory of relativity or STR) is the physical theory of measurement in inertial frames of reference proposed in 1905 by Albert Einstein (after the considerable and independent contributions of Hendrik Lorentz, Henri Poincaré and others) in the paper "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies". It generalizes Galileo's principle of relativity–that all uniform motion is relative, and that there is no absolute and well-defined state of rest (no privileged reference frames)–from mechanics to all the laws of physics, including both the laws of mechanics and of electrodynamics, whatever they may be. Special relativity incorporates the principle that the speed of light is the same for all inertial observers regardless of the state of motion of the source.

This theory has a wide range of consequences, including counter-intuitive ones such as length contraction, time dilation and relativity of simultaneity, contradicting the classical notion that the duration of the time interval between two events is equal for all observers. (On the other hand, it introduces the space-time interval, which is invariant.) Combined with other laws of physics, the two postulates of special relativity predict the equivalence of matter and energy, as expressed in the mass-energy equivalence formula E = mc2, where c is the speed of light in a vacuum. The predictions of special relativity agree well with Newtonian mechanics in their common realm of applicability, specifically in experiments in which all velocities are small compared to the speed of light. The theory is termed "special" because it applies the principle of relativity only to frames in uniform relative motion.

Special relativity reveals that c is not just the velocity of a certain phenomenon, namely the propagation of electromagnetic radiation (light)—but rather a fundamental feature of the way space and time are unified as spacetime. A consequence of this is that it is impossible for any particle that has mass to be accelerated to the speed of light.

Explanations for Universal Acceleration

The are several explanations for UA. As it is difficult for proponents of Flat Earth Theory to obtain grant money for scientific research, it is nigh on impossible to determine which of these theories is correct.

Dark Energy
This model proposes that the disk of our Earth is lifted by dark energy, an unknown form of energy which, according to globularist physicists, makes up about 70% of the universe. The origin of this energy is unknown.

Davis Plane
This model states that there is an infinite plane of exotic matter somewhere below the disk, pushing in the opposite manner of traditional gravity. This is a recent theory, and is in progress.

Variations in Gravity

Q: Why does gravity vary with altitude?

A: According to the model of Celestial Gravitation the Moon and Stars have a slight gravitational pull. This is given as an answer to tidal effects and variations of gravity with altitude. Other models reject the concept of gravity entirely and question whether those slight variations in gravity actually exist. See: Variations in Gravity

Terminal Velocity

In the Round Earth model, terminal velocity happens when the acceleration due to gravity is equal to the acceleration due to drag. In the Flat Earth model, however, there are no balanced forces: terminal velocity happens when the upward acceleration of the falling object is equal to the upward acceleration of the Earth.

Q: How is terminal velocity defined within the Flat Earth Theory?

A: When the acceleration of the falling object is equal to the acceleration of the Earth, the object has reached terminal velocity relative to the Earth.


What is the Flat Earth Society?
United Nations emblem
The United Nations emblem closely resembles the Flat Earth map.
The Flat Earth Society is a group actively promoting the Flat Earth Movement worldwide. Descending from Samuel Shenton's International Flat Earth Research Society, and the Universal Zetetic Society before it, we continue the age-old tradition of questioning the Round Earth doctrine and challenging authorities. Acknowledging the link between various unconventional beliefs, the Society also occasionally engages in other controversial debates, striving to provide a voice for all free thinkers and Zeteticists.

What do all of these acronyms mean?
Here is a link to Flat Earth Terminology!

What evidence do you have?
The evidence for a Flat Earth is derived from many different facets of science and philosophy. The simplest is by relying on ones own senses to discern the true nature of the world around us. The world looks flat, the bottoms of clouds are flat, the movement of the Sun; these are all examples of your senses telling you that we do not live on a spherical heliocentric world. This is using what's called an empirical approach, or an approach that relies on information from your senses. Alternatively, when using Descartes' method of Cartesian doubt to skeptically view the world around us, one quickly finds that the notion of a spherical world is the theory which has the burden of proof and not Flat Earth Theory.

Perhaps the best example of Flat Earth proof is the Bedford Level Experiment. In short, this was an experiment performed many times on a six-mile stretch of water that proved the surface of the water to be flat. It did not conform to the curvature of the Earth that Round Earth proponents teach.

Many other experiments demonstrating the lack of curvature in the Earth may be found in Earth Not a Globe by Samuel Rowbotham, as well as in the Experimental Evidence section of this Wiki.

Is the Flat Earth Theory connected to a religion?
The Flat Earth Theory is neither officially nor unofficially associated with any religion. Throughout the ages various religious institutions have championed a Flat Earth model for the world. Unfortunately this leaves us with the vestigial thought that Flat Earth theory and religions are symbiotic. They are not, even though many religions today, both mainstream and otherwise, still teach its followers that the world is flat. While they are not incorrect, believing in a Flat Earth isn't contingent upon believing in a deity or being a part of any religion.

People have been into space. How have they not discovered that the Earth is flat?
The most commonly accepted explanation of this is that the space agencies of the world are involved in a conspiracy faking space travel and exploration. This likely began during the Cold War's 'Space Race', in which the USSR and USA were obsessed with beating each other into space to the point that each faked their accomplishments in an attempt to keep pace with the other's supposed achievements. Since the end of the Cold War, however, the conspiracy is most likely motivated by greed rather than political gains, and using only some of their funding to continue to fake space travel saves a lot of money to embezzle for themselves.

In light of the above, please note that we are not suggesting that space agencies are aware that the Earth is flat and actively covering the fact up. They depict the Earth as being round simply because that is what they expect it to be.

There are many pictures on the Internet and in other media depicting the Earth as being round. Why do these not disprove the Flat Earth Theory?
In general, we at the Flat Earth Society do not lend much credibility to photographic evidence. It is too easily manipulated and altered. Many of the videos posted here to "prove a round Earth" by showing curvature will show no curvature or even concave curvature at parts. The sources are so inaccurate it's difficult to build an argument on them in either case. Furthermore, barrel distortion and other quirks of modern cameras will cause a picture to distort in ways which may not be immediately obvious or apparent, especially without references within the picture. Photographs are also prone to distortion when taken through the bent glass of a pressurized cabin as well as atmospheric conditions on the outside. With this litany of problems, it's easy to see why photographic evidence is not to be trusted.

It's also worth noting that if a person were to look down at the Earth from high above, they would expect to see a circular shape where the sun's area of light was shining. This explains why high altitude photographs are generally curved to produce the illusion of a round horizon.

Geography and Related Phenomena

What does the Earth look like? How is circumnavigation possible?
As seen in the diagrams above, the Earth is in the form of a disk with the North Pole in the center and Antarctica as a wall surrounding the known continents. This is the generally accepted model among members of the society. In this model, circumnavigation is performed by moving in a great circle around the North Pole.

The Earth is surrounded on all sides by an ice wall that holds the oceans back. This ice wall is what explorers have named Antarctica. Beyond the ice wall is a topic of great interest to the Flat Earth Society. To our knowledge, no one has been very far past the ice wall and returned to tell of their journey. What we do know is that it encircles the earth and serves to hold in our oceans and helps protect us from whatever lies beyond.

Here is picture of a proposed, but certainly not definitive, Flat Earth. Other maps representing various Flat Earth models can be found on our Flat Earth Maps page.

Flat Earth map

How do you explain day/night cycles and seasons?
Day/night cycle on a Flat Earth
A simplified animation of the day/night cycle in FET over the course of 24 hours. Note that, in actuality, the lunar cycle is slightly slower than the solar cycle
Lunar and Solar rotation cycles
The lunar rotation cycle is about 347.81°/day
Day and night cycles are easily explained on a Flat Earth. The Sun moves in circles around the North Pole. When it is over your head, it's day. When it's not, it's night. The light of the sun is confined to a limited area upon the Earth. The picture below illustrates how the sun moves and also how seasons work on a Flat Earth. There are several potential theories for the apparent effect of the Sun's rising and setting.

Explanation of the seasons in Flat Earth Theory

When the sun is further away from the North Pole, it's winter in the northern hemiplane (or hemisphere) and summer in the south. A more simplistic picture can be found below.

Seasons in Flat Earth Theory

How is there a magnetic field? Magnets can't be unipolar
While it's true that unipolar magnets can't exist, this isn't a problem for the Flat Earth. This is because ring magnets, which are shaped like (you guessed it!) a flat disk, are capable of having radial magnetization. In a radial magnet, one magnetic pole is at the center and other is at all points on the edge of the magnet. A magnet like this can be found in loudspeakers, and perfectly replicates what is found on the Earth.

As a passenger on an aircraft, how is it I can see the curvature of the Earth?
Quite simply, you cannot.

If the Earth were round, one would need to observe it from an altitude of 60,000ft in ideal atmospheric conditions (assuming a field of view of at least 90°) to have a clear view of the supposed curvature[1]. Commercial aircraft do not fly this high. Generally, cruising altitudes vary between 33,000ft and 42,000ft[2], with 36,000ft being a commonly-cited figure. In addition, the windows on commercial aircraft are small and heavily curved. Even if they flew high enough for a person to see curvature, it would still not be visible to passengers.

It is likely that those claiming to have personally visually discerned curvature from an aeroplane are experiencing a form of confirmation bias.

How is weather created in FET?
Many weather patterns are actually created by the land itself. For example - rain shadow. Rain shadow is where somewhere on the eastern side of a mountain range (because weather/clouds travel from the west generally) is deprived of rain not just once, but nearly all the time. This is because the clouds are forced upwards by the mountains blocking their path and become cooler and condense, meaning water droplets form and it rains on/before the mountains thereby not raining on the leeward side.

Other weather patterns are created by geographic position like the tropics being humid - they are surrounded by water which is constantly warmed and evaporated.

Physics and Cosmology

If the planets are round, why isn't the Earth?

The 2007 retrograde of Mars. Retrograde motion occurs from the fact that the planets are revolving around the sun while the sun itself moves around the hub of the Earth. This particular path the planets take makes it appear as if several of them make a loop along their journeys across the night sky.
Planets (from Ancient Greek ἀστὴρ πλανήτης [astēr planētēs, "wandering star"], or just πλανήτης [planḗtēs, "wanderer"]) are orbiting astronomical objects. The Earth is not a planet by definition, as it sits at the centre of our solar system above which the planets and the Sun revolve. The Earth's uniqueness, fundamental differences and centrality makes any comparison to other nearby celestial bodies insufficient - Like comparing basketballs to the court on which they bounce.

Why doesn't gravity pull the Earth into a spherical shape?
The Earth isn't pulled into a sphere because the force known as gravity exists in a greatly diminished form compared to what is commonly taught. The Earth is constantly accelerating up at a rate of 32 feet per second squared (or 9.8 meters per second squared). This constant acceleration causes what you think of as gravity. Imagine sitting in a car that never stops speeding up. You will be forever pushed into your seat. The Earth works much the same way. It is constantly accelerating upwards being pushed by a universal accelerator (UA) known as dark energy or aetheric wind.

There are also other theories of flat Earth thought that maintain that the Earth sits on an infinite plane, with the sun moving overhead. Gravity works much like it does in a round-Earth model, and the Earth will never form into a sphere because the plane is endless.

Objects cannot exceed the speed of light. Doesn't this mean that the Earth can't accelerate forever?
Due to special relativity, this is not the case. At this point, many readers will question the validity of any answer which uses advanced, intimidating-sounding physics terms to explain a position. However, it is true. The relevant equation is v/c = tanh (at/c). One will find that in this equation, tanh(at/c) can never exceed or equal 1. This means that velocity can never reach the speed of light, regardless of how long one accelerates for and the rate of the acceleration.

Universal Acceleration ( UA ) is a theory of gravity in the Flat Earth Model. UA asserts that the Earth and the observable universe are accelerating 'upward' at a constant rate of 9.8m/s^2.
This produces the effect commonly referred to as "gravity".
The traditional theory of gravitation (e.g. Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation, General Theory of Relativity, etc) is incompatible with the Flat Earth Model because it requires a large, spherical mass pulling objects uniformly toward its center.
According to Flat Earth Theory, gravity is not the main force keeping us on the ground. Instead, there is a force that produces identical effects as observed from the surface of the earth. This force is known as "Universal Acceleration" (abbreviated as UA).
Objects on the earth's surface have weight because all sufficiently massive celestial bodies are accelerating upward at the rate of 9.8 m/s^2 relative to a local observer immediately above said body. The mass of the earth is thought to shield the objects atop it from the direct force of UA. Alternatively, it is possible that the force of UA can actually pass through objects, but its effect on smaller bodies is negligible (similar to gravity in RET cosmology, which only has a noticeable affect on very large objects).
However, not all Flat Earth models dismiss the theory of gravity. The Davis Model proposes that the earth is an infinite plane exerting a finite gravitational pull (g), which is consistent with Gauss's Law.
The phenomenon we observe everyday when falling is currently substantiated in modern physics by what is called the Equivalence Principle .
This principle in physics states that in a relative frame of reference, it is not possible to locally discern whether the frame is accelerating upwards, or if the object inside the frame is affected by gravity.
Several frequently asked questions are, "How is that I can jump and then come back down?" and "Why is it that I feel as though I'm being pulled toward the earth?"
Since the Earth is pushing you upwards, you are moving at the same speed as the Earth, much like when you are sitting in a car, the car is pushing you along. When you jump, your upward velocity is for a moment, greater than the Earth's so you rise above it. But after a few moments, the Earth's increasing velocity due to its acceleration eventually catches up.
It is a common misconception that if we were to continuously accelerate over time, we would eventually be moving faster than the speed of light. This is of course, incorrect as nothing with mass may do so.
According to the Special theory of Relativity, the Earth can accelerate forever without reaching or passing the speed of light. Relative to an observer on Earth (more specifically, an observer who recently left the Earth, e.g. a person who jumped up), the Earth's acceleration will always be 1g. Relative to an inertial observer in the universe, however, the Earth's acceleration decreases as the its velocity approaches c. It all depends on our frame of reference to measure and explain the Earth's motion. Thus, despite what most people think, there is no absolute "speed" or velocity of the Earth.
Special relativity (SR) (also known as the special theory of relativity or STR) is the physical theory of measurement in inertial frames of reference proposed in 1905 by Albert Einstein (after the considerable and independent contributions of Hendrik Lorentz, Henri Poincaré and others) in the paper "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies". It generalizes Galileo's principle of relativity–that all uniform motion is relative, and that there is no absolute and well-defined state of rest (no privileged reference frames)–from mechanics to all the laws of physics, including both the laws of mechanics and of electrodynamics, whatever they may be. Special relativity incorporates the principle that the speed of light is the same for all inertial observers regardless of the state of motion of the source.
This theory has a wide range of consequences, including counter-intuitive ones such as length contraction, time dilation and relativity of simultaneity, contradicting the classical notion that the duration of the time interval between two events is equal for all observers. (On the other hand, it introduces the space-time interval, which is invariant.) Combined with other laws of physics, the two postulates of special relativity predict the equivalence of matter and energy, as expressed in the mass-energy equivalence formula E = mc2, where c is the speed of light in a vacuum. The predictions of special relativity agree well with Newtonian mechanics in their common realm of applicability, specifically in experiments in which all velocities are small compared to the speed of light.
The theory is termed "special" because it applies the principle of relativity only to frames in uniform relative motion.
Special relativity reveals that c is not just the velocity of a certain phenomenon, namely the propagation of electromagnetic radiation (light)—but rather a fundamental feature of the way space and time are unified as spacetime. A consequence of this is that it is impossible for any particle that has mass to be accelerated to the speed of light.
Let's define the event to have space-time coordinates in system S and in S'. Then the Lorentz transformation specifies that these coordinates are related in the following way:

where is called the Lorentz factor and c is the speed of light in a vacuum.
Differential Equation for velocity on earth:
Integrating for velocity:
Limit as t -> infinity = c
As you can see, it is impossible for dark energy to accelerate the Earth past the speed of light.
The are several explanations for UA. As it is difficult for proponents of Flat Earth Theory to obtain grant money for scientific research, it is nigh on impossible to determine which of these theories is correct.
This model proposes that the disk of our Earth is lifted by dark energy, an unknown form of energy which, according to globularist physicists, makes up about 70% of the universe. The origin of this energy is unknown.
This model states that there is an infinite plane of exotic matter somewhere below the disk, pushing in the opposite manner of traditional gravity. This is a recent theory, and is in progress.
Q: Why does gravity vary with altitude?
A: According to the model of Celestial Gravitation the Moon and Stars have a slight gravitational pull. This is given as an answer to tidal effects and variations of gravity with altitude. Other models reject the concept of gravity entirely and question whether those slight variations in gravity actually exist. See: Variations in Gravity
In the Round Earth model, terminal velocity happens when the acceleration due to gravity is equal to the acceleration due to drag. In the Flat Earth model, however, there are no balanced forces: terminal velocity happens when the upward acceleration of the falling object is equal to the upward acceleration of the Earth.
Q: How is terminal velocity defined within the Flat Earth Theory?
A: When the acceleration of the falling object is equal to the acceleration of the Earth, the object has reached terminal velocity relative to the Earth.
The Davis model, suggested by John Davis, states that gravity does indeed exist. In this model, the Earth is an infinite disk with finite gravity. This was mathematically demonstrated with the following:

Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics

The Equivalence Principle is a fundamental principle of physics which states that gravity operates as if the observer was in an upwardly accelerating frame of reference. Despite that it takes more force to move a more massive object through space (Newton's Second Law), when in free-fall bodies of different masses 'fall' at the same rate without exhibition of different inertial resistances, just as if the bodies were inert and the Earth were accelerating upwards into them. The Equivalence Principle is also used to explain why observers in free-fall feel weightless, rather than feeling their own weight pulling them down (ie. while in a Zero G plane). Experiments with light and atomic clocks at various scales have further confirmed the nature of the Equivalence Principle [1] .
“ There is no experiment observers can perform to distinguish whether an acceleration arises because of a gravitational force or because their reference frame is accelerating. ” —Douglas C. Giancoli, Physics for Scientists and Engineers with Modern Physics, p. 155.
“ Whilst preparing a review article on his new special theory of relativity, [Einstein] became convinced that the key to the extension of the principle of relativity to accelerated motion lay in the remarkable and unexplained empirical coincidence of the equality of inertial and gravitational masses. To interpret and exploit this coincidence, he introduced a new and powerful physical principle, soon to be called the ‘principle of equivalence,’ upon which his search for a general theory of relativity would be based. ” —John Norton, What was Einstein's Principle of Equivalence? ( Archive )
“ Einstein himself thought the equivalence principle deeply mysterious. ‘Mass,’ he wrote, ‘is defined by the resistance that a body opposes to its acceleration (inert mass). It is also measured by the weight of the body (heavy mass). That these two radically different definitions lead to the same value for the mass of a body is, in itself, an astonishing fact.’ Francis Everitt of Stanford put it more forcibly. ‘In truth, the equivalence principle is the weirdest apparent fact in all of physics,’ he said. ‘Have you noticed that when a physicist calls something a principle, he means something he believes with total conviction but doesn’t in the slightest degree
understand.’ ” —Nigel Calde, Magic Universe - A Grand Tour of Modern Science, 2005
“ This equivalence of the gravitational and inertial masses (which allows us to refer simply to 'the mass'), is a truly remarkable coincidence in the Newtonian theory. In this theory there is no a-priori reason why the quantity that determines the magnitude of the gravitational force on the particle should equal the quantity that determines the particle's 'resistance' to an applied force in general. ” —General Relativity: An Introduction for Physicists
A Space.com article Relativity: The Thought Experiments Behind Einstein's Theory ( Archive ) by astrophysicist Paul Sutter ( bio ) explains that under a plain interpretation of how Newtonian Gravity pulls on objects, a body with twice the mass of another should fall faster. Newtonian Gravity requires a separation of inertial and gravitational mass and their equivalence for bodies to fall equally. It is suggested that this is an ad-hoc mechanism to explain physical phenomena.
“ Einstein's first insight into the nature of gravity was to put a new twist on an old idea. In Isaac Newton's original mathematical description of gravity ("OG"?), there's an odd coincidence when it comes to the concept of "mass." In one famous equation, F = ma, mass is your inertia — how much oomph it takes to shove you along. In Newton's other equation on gravity, mass is more like gravitational charge — the level of attraction you might feel toward the Earth, for example.
Objects with twice the mass feel twice the attraction toward the Earth, and should therefore fall twice as quickly. But years back, Galileo Galilei had conclusively shown that they don't: Neglecting air resistance, all objects fall at the same rate regardless of their mass.
Thus for Newton's theory to work, inertial mass had to be the same as gravitational mass, but only by sheer coincidence: there was no reason for this equality to hold. For an object with twice the mass, the Earth may pull on it twice as strongly, but this is perfectly canceled out by the fact that it's now twice as hard to get the object moving. Inertial and gravitational masses move in perfect lockstep.
This odd correspondence had long been a puzzle in gravitational circles, but in 1907, Einstein took it one step further. The physicist imagined what would happen if you were to fall from a great height. Again neglecting air resistance, your inertial and gravitational masses would cancel, making you feel perfectly weightless, as if there were no gravity at all. But zero-gravity environments are precisely the playground of Special Relativity, the theory he had cooked up just a couple years prior that wove our conceptions of space and time into the unified fabric of spacetime.
To Einstein, this was a major clue. Lurking in the shadows of gravity was his precious special relativity and the essential concept of space-time, and what made that realization possible was the elevation of the equivalence between inertial and gravitational masses into a fundamental principle, rather than the awkward afterthought it had been. ”
See this slide from the Introduction to Cosmology by the 4th Cosmology School at Cracow, Poland ( Archive ):

The Equivalence Principle is also said by some to be a coincidence in General Relativity. See the following quotes.
On p.112 of Introductory Physics: Building Models to Describe Our World ( Archive ) by astrophysicist Ryan Martin ( bio ), Et al., it says:
“ As you recall, the weight of an object is given by the mass of the object multiplied by the strength of the gravitational field, g. There is no reason that the mass that is used to calculate weight, F g = mg, has to be the same quantity as the mass that is used to calculate inertia F = ma. Thus, people will sometimes make the distinction between “gravitational mass” (the mass that you use to calculate weight and the force of gravity) and “inertial mass” as described above. Very precise experiments have been carried out to determine if the gravitational and inertial masses are equal. So far, experiments have been unable to detect any difference between the two quantities. As we will see, both Newton’s Universal Theory of Gravity and Einstein Theory of General Relativity assume that the two are indeed equal. In fact, it is a key requirement for Einstein’s Theory that the two be equal (the assumption that they are equal is called the “Equivalence Principle”). You should however keep in mind that there is no physical reason that the two are the same, and that as far as we know, it is a coincidence! ”
Another quote from a publication of the AIAA on p.99:
“ Newton proposed two formulas: the law of motion, F = ma, and the law of gravitation, F = GMm/r2. The mass, m, has two distinct meanings in the two formulas, one as the receptacle of inertia, the other as the source and receptacle of gravitation; yet somehow the two are identical. Stated another way, if mi and mg are respectively inertial and gravitational mass, then for any two bodies A and B, regardless of what substance they are, the quantity
appears to be identically zero. It was just this identity that Einstein denominated a principle (weak equivalence) and extended (strong equivalence) to all the laws of physics in accelerated frames, whether the acceleration is inertial or gravitational in origin. Strong equivalence is the basis on which it becomes possible in general relativity to represent gravitation by a curvature of spacetime. Contrary to what is sometimes thought, however, general relativity does not explain equivalence. The principle is an assumption that, once made, allows the effects of gravity to be represented thus. The phenomenon remains a mystery and still needs testing. ”
Theoretical Physicist Anatoly Alekseyevich Logunov ( bio ) remarks:
https://pdfroom.com/books/the-theory-of-gravity/X623zYb6g4Z
“ GRT does not comply with the equivalence principle, does not explain the equality of the inert and active gravitational masses, and gives no unique prediction for gravitational eﬀects. It does not contain the usual conservation laws of energy–momentum and of angular momentum of matter. ”
GRT = General Relativity Theory, as defined earlier in the paper:
“ Therein, also, critical comments are presented concerning general relativity theory (GRT), which still remain in force. ”
The following video briefly describes the Equivalence Principle (Runtime: 5m):
The effect of the surface's upwards acceleration can be seen in a hanging and falling water balloon (left) and a mechanical accelerometer (right).
http://gravityprobe.org/GravityProbe%20Links/Galileo-Undone-Mar-10-2020.pdf ( Archive )

https://web2.ph.utexas.edu/~gleeson/RelativityNotesChapter8.pdf ( Archive )
8.3.1 The Monkey and the Hunter
“ There is a very popular demonstration that is performed in most high school
and college introductory physics classes. There is a gun of some type that
launches a projectile and a target object, usually a toy monkey, that can fall
some distance. The gun and the monkey are rigged so that at the instant
the gun fires the monkey is released to start to fall. ”

Figure 8.3: Monkey and the Hunter A popular lecture demonstration is to fire a projectile at a hanging toy monkey. The monkey is released at the instant that the gun is fired.
“ The class is usually asked where does the hunter aim. Since the monkey
is falling, there is an argument that the hunter should aim below the initial
position of the monkey to compensate for the finite time of flight of the
projectile. On the other hand, the projectile has an arced trajectory and
thus the aim should be above the current position. The correct answer is
that the hunter should aim at the present position of the monkey. This is
because once the gun is fired both the projectile and monkey are falling with
an acceleration of g. In the frame accelerating down at a rate g, the effects
of gravity are cancelled and thus neither the monkey nor the projectile have
accelerated motion. In that frame, the projectile travels in a straight line
and the monkey never moves. Note that if the aim is correct, no matter how
small the projectile muzzle velocity, it will ultimately hit the monkey. This
is an interesting pre-relativity example of the equivalence principle. ”
https://web.archive.org/web/20200704180931/http://physics.gu.se/LISEBERG/callab.html
Carousel with Swings
“ A good starting point is the carousel with swings shown in Fig. 1. As the carousel rotates, the swings hang out from the vertical line, thereby enabling the chains to provide the force giving the required centripetal acceleration, while still counteracting the force of gravity. Take a moment consider which swings will hang out the most: the empty ones or the ones loaded with a child or with an heavy adult! In this situation students often pick the most heavily-loaded swings. They watch in amazement as the carousel starts - all swings (at the same radius) hang at the same angle, independent of load. ”

“ This is an eye-catching example of the equivalence principle: The angle is determined by the ratio between the centripetal force and the weight. Since the intertial mass (entering the centripetal force) and the gravitational mass (entering the weight, mg), are equal, the angle is independent of the mass. ”
In Equivalence of Gravitational and Inertial Mass ( Archive ) by Benjamin Crowell, Ph.D. ( bio ), we read about Roland Eötvös' investigation into the Equivalence Principle:
“ We find experimentally that both gravitational and inertial mass are conserved to a high degree of precision for a great number of processes, including chemical reactions, melting, boiling, soaking up water with a sponge, and rotting of meat and vegetables. Now it's logically possible that both gravitational and inertial mass are conserved, but that there is no particular relationship between them, in which case we would say that they are separately conserved. On the other hand, the two conservation laws may be redundant, like having one law against murder and another law against killing people! ”

Figure a: The two pendulum bobs are constructed with equal gravitational masses. If their inertial masses are also equal, then each pendulum should take exactly the same amount of time per swing.
“ Here's an experiment that gets at the issue: stand up now and drop a coin and one of your shoes side by side. I used a 400-gram shoe and a 2-gram penny, and they hit the floor at the same time as far as I could tell by eye. This is an interesting result, but a physicist and an ordinary person will find it interesting for different reasons.
The layperson is surprised, since it would seem logical that heaver objects would always fall faster than light ones. However, it's fairly easy to prove that if air friction is negligible, any two objects made of the same substance must have identical motion when they fall. For instance, a 2-kg copper mass must exhibit the same falling motion as a 1-kg copper mass, because nothing would be changed by physically joining together two 1-kg copper masses to make a single 2-kg copper mass. Suppose, for example, that they are joined with a dab of glue; the glue isn't under any strain, because the two masses are doing the same thing side by side. Since the glue isn't really doing anything, it makes no difference whether the masses fall separately or side by side. 2 ”

Figure b: If the cylinders have slightly unequal ratios of inertial to gravitational mass, their trajectories will be a little different.
“ What a physicist finds remarkable about the shoe-and-penny experiment is that it came out the way it did even though the shoe and the penny are made of different substances. There is absolutely no theoretical reason why this should be true. We could say that it happens because the greater gravitational mass of the shoe is exactly counteracted by its greater inertial mass, which makes it harder for gravity to get it moving, but that just leaves us wondering why inertial mass and gravitational mass are always in proportion to each other. It's possible that they are only approximately equivalent. Most of the mass of ordinary matter comes from neutrons and protons, and we could imagine, for instance, that neutrons and protons do not have exactly the same ratio of gravitational to inertial mass. This would show up as a different ratio of gravitational to inertial mass for substances containing different proportions of neutrons and protons.
Galileo did the first numerical experiments on this issue in the seventeenth century by rolling balls down inclined planes, although he didn't think about his results in these terms. A fairly easy way to improve on Galileo's accuracy is to use pendulums with bobs made of different materials. Suppose, for example, that we construct an aluminum bob and a brass bob, and use a double-pan balance to verify to good precision that their gravitational masses are equal. If we then measure the time required for each pendulum to perform a hundred cycles, we can check whether the results are the same. If their inertial masses are unequal, then the one with a smaller inertial mass will go through each cycle faster, since gravity has an easier time accelerating and decelerating it. With this type of experiment, one can easily verify that gravitational and inertial mass are proportional to each other to an accuracy of  10 −3 or  10 −4 .
In 1889, the Hungarian physicist Roland Eötvös used a slightly different approach to verify the equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass for various substances to an accuracy of about  10 −8 , and the best such experiment, figure d, improved on even this phenomenal accuracy, bringing it to the  10 −12 level. 3 In all the experiments described so far, the two objects move along similar trajectories: straight lines in the penny-and-shoe and inclined plane experiments, and circular arcs in the pendulum version. The Eötvös-style experiment looks for differences in the objects' trajectories. The concept can be understood by imagining the following simplified version. Suppose, as in figure b, we roll a brass cylinder off of a tabletop and measure where it hits the floor, and then do the same with an aluminum cylinder, making sure that both of them go over the edge with precisely the same velocity. An object with zero gravitational mass would fly off straight and hit the wall, while an object with zero inertial mass would make a sudden 90-degree turn and drop straight to the floor. If the aluminum and brass cylinders have ordinary, but slightly unequal, ratios of gravitational to inertial mass, then they will follow trajectories that are just slightly different. In other words, if inertial and gravitational mass are not exactly proportional to each other for all substances, then objects made of different substances will have different trajectories in the presence of gravity. ”

Figure c: A simplified drawing of an Eötvös-style experiment. If the two masses, made out of two different substances, have slightly different ratios of inertial to gravitational mass, then the apparatus will twist slightly as the earth spins.
“ A simplified drawing of a practical, high-precision experiment is shown in figure c. Two objects made of different substances are balanced on the ends of a bar, which is suspended at the center from a thin fiber. The whole apparatus moves through space on a complicated, looping trajectory arising from the rotation of the earth superimposed on the earth's orbital motion around the sun. Both the earth's gravity and the sun's gravity act on the two objects. If their inertial masses are not exactly in proportion to their gravitational masses, then they will follow slightly different trajectories through space, which will result in a very slight twisting of the fiber between the daytime, when the sun's gravity is pulling upward, and the night, when the sun's gravity is downward. Figure d shows a more realistic picture of the apparatus. ”

Figure d: A more realistic drawing of Braginskii and Panov's experiment. The whole thing was encased in a tall vacuum tube, which was placed in a sealed basement whose temperature was controlled to within 0.02°C. The total mass of the platinum and aluminum test masses, plus the tungsten wire and the balance arms, was only 4.4 g. To detect tiny motions, a laser beam was bounced off of a mirror attached to the wire. There was so little friction that the balance would have taken on the order of several years to calm down completely after being put in place; to stop these vibrations, static electrical forces were applied through the two circular plates to provide very gentle twists on the ellipsoidal mass between them.
The Equivalence Principle is a fundamental tenet of General Relativity, which describes that the surface of the Earth is accelerating upwards through curved space-time to cause the Equivalence Principle effects as experienced on Earth. The following citations describe why space was decided to be curved in the Round Earth Theory.
From Gravity: A Very Short Introduction ( Archive ) by Cosmologist  Timothy Clifton ( bio ), we read:
“ Consider a skydiver jumping out of an airplane. The skydiver falls freely, up to the effects of air resistance. According to Einstein, the skydiver's path is the straightest line possible through the curved space-time around the Earth. From the skydiver's perspective this seems quite natural. Except for the air rushing past her, the skydiver feels no perturbing forces at all. In fact, if it weren't for the air resistance, she would experience weightlessness in the same way that an astronaut does in orbit. The only reason we think the skydiver is accelerating is because we are used to using the surface of the Earth as our frame of reference. If we free ourselves from this convention, then we have no reason to think the skydiver is accelerating at all.
Now consider yourself on the ground, looking up at the falling daredevil. Normally, your intuitive description of your own motion would be that you are stationary. But again this is only because of our slavish regard to the Earth as the arbiter of what is at rest and what is moving. Free yourself from this prison, and you realize that you are, in fact, accelerating. You feel a force on the soles of your feet that pushes you upwards, in the same way that you would if you were in a lift that accelerated upwards very quickly. In Einstein's picture there is no difference between your experience sanding on Earth and your experience in the lift. In both situations you are accelerating upwards. In the latter situation it is the lift that is responsible for your acceleration. In the former, it is the fact that the Earth is solid that pushes you upwards through space-time, knocking you off your free-fall trajectory. That the surface of the Earth can accelerate upwards at every point on its surface, and remain as a solid object, is because it exists in a curved space-time and not in a flat space.
With this change in perspective the true nature of gravity becomes apparent. The free falling skydiver is brought to Earth because the space-time through which she falls is curved. It is not an external force that tugs her downwards, but her own natural motion through a curved space. On the other hand, as a person standing on the ground, the pressure you feel on the soles of your feet is due to the rigidity of the Earth pushing you upwards. Again, there is no external force pulling you to Earth. It is only the electrostatic forces in the rocks below your feet that keep the ground rigid, and that prevents you from taking what would be your natural motion (which would also be free fall).
So, if we free ourselves from defining our motion with respect to the surface of the Earth we realize that the skydiver is not accelerating, while the person who stands on the surface of the Earth is accelerating. Just the opposite of what we usually think. Going back to Galileo's experiment on the leaning tower of Pisa, we can now see why he observed all of his cannonballs to fall at the same rate. It wasn't really the cannonballs that were accelerating away from Galileo at all, it was Galileo that was accelerating away from the cannonballs! ”
In a section titled Why Is Spacetime Curved? of the book Time Travel in Einstein’s Universe by John Richard Gott III ( bio ), professor of astrophysical sciences at Princeton University, we read:
“ A famous (perhaps apocryphal) story about Einstein describes one occasion when he fell into conversation with a man at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton. During their chat, the man suddenly pulled a little book from his coat pocket and jotted something down. Einstein asked, “What is that?" “Oh,” the man answered, “it's a notebook I keep, so that any time I have a good idea I can write it down before I forget it.” “I never needed one of those," Einstein replied. “I only had three good ideas.”
One of them occurred to him in 1907—what he would later call the “happiest” idea of his life. Einstein noted that an observer on Earth and an observer on an accelerating spaceship in interstellar space would have the same sensations. Follow this chain of thought to see why. Galileo had shown that an observer dropping two balls of different mass on Earth sees them hit the floor at the same time. If an observer in an accelerating rocket in interstellar space performed the same experiment, dropping two balls of different mass, they would float motionless in space—but, since the rocket was firing, the floor of the spaceship would simply come up and hit both of them at once. Both observers thus should see the same thing. In one
case, it is the result of gravity; in the other case, it is caused by an accelerating floor with no gravity involved. But then Einstein proposed something very bold—if the two situations looked the same, they must be the same. Gravity was nothing more than an accelerated frame-of-reference. Likewise, Einstein noted that if you get in an elevator on Earth and cut the cable, you and everything in the elevator will fall toward Earth at the same rate. (Galileo again—objects of different mass all fall at the same rate.) So, how do things look to you in the falling elevator? Any object you drop will float weightless in the elevator—because you, the object, and the elevator are all falling at the same rate together. This is exactly what you would see if you were in a spaceship floating in interstellar space. All the objects in the spaceship, including you, would be weightless. If you
want to experience weightlessness just like an astronaut, all you have to do is get in an elevator and cut the cable. (This works, of course, only until the elevator hits bottom.)
Einstein's assertion that gravity and acceleration are, the same—which he called the equivalence principle—was influenced, no doubt, by his previous success in equating the situation of a stationary magnet and a moving charge with that of a stationary charge and a moving magnet. But if gravity and
accelerated motion were the same, then gravity was nothing but accelerated motion. Earth's surface was simply accelerating upward. This explained why a heavy ball and a light ball, when dropped, hit the floor at the same time. When the balls are released, they just float there—weightless. The floor (Earth) simply comes up and hits them. What a remarkably fresh way of looking at things!
Still one must ask how Earth’s surface could be accelerating upward (away from Earth's center) if Earth itself is not getting bigger and bigger with time like a balloon. The only way the assertion could make sense is by considering spacetime to be curved.
Einstein proposed that mass and energy cause spacetime to curve. It took him 8 years of hard work to derive the equations governing this. He had to learn the abstruse geometry of curved higher dimensional spaces. He had to learn about the Riemannian curvature tensor—a mathematical monster with 256 components telling how spacetime could be curved. This was very difficult mathematics, and Einstein ran upon many false leads. But he didn't give up because he had great faith in the idea. ”
“ Einstein’s view of gravity is that things don’t fall; the floor comes up! ” —Epstein, Lewis Carroll: Relativity Visualized. (Insight Press, San Francisco, 1988) pp. 65 ff.
Tony Goldsmith, author of a mass-media book Space-time for Absolute Beginners and his Absolute Beginner book series, explains the Equivalence Principle as follows ( Archive ):
“ When you are in a lift you may be accelerated. Where is this coming from? It is the lift pushing you up.
Einstein said that the Earth does the same as a lift (which has an acceleration of g). The Earth isn't in the way; it is doing the pushing. This is his Equivalence Principle. ”
A popular science video by Veritasium with over 10 million views, Why Gravity is NOT a Force , explains at the 9:57 mark how in General Relativity you accelerate upwards without changing your spatial coordinates with the General Relativity equation:
“ But if I'm accelerating up and so is everyone else around the world and presumably the whole surface of the Earth, then shouldn't the whole earth be expanding?
No. It is possible for you to be accelerating even though your spatial coordinates are not changing. I will show you one equation from General Relativity...
[equation]
...so in curved space-time you have to accelerate just to stand still. ”
In a book on how math relates to the universe One to Nine: The Inner Life of Numbers by mathematician Andrew Hodges ( bio ), he describes that the earth's surface is accelerating upwards against your feet in the geometry of curved space-time ( Archive ):
“ Earth's mass curves the geometry of space-time in such a way that the Earth's surface is always accelerating upwards at 9.81 m/sec^2 and so presses on your feet. Weight doesn't exist, but the Earth's electromagnetic forces push harder on fat boys than on slim. This sounds crazy, but it is no crazier than the fact that if you steam straight ahead on a sphere you will end up back where you started. Such things are made possible by curvature. ”
A physics student, Berry, came across this subject and made us a brief paper about what he learned in his upper level physics classes, showing the math on how in the globe model of gravity the surface of the earth is actually accelerating upwards ( Archive ).
“ This paper uses the Schwarzchild geometry utilized by the current globe Earth model to show that the surface of the Earth is accelerating upwards. ”
A great many experiments have taken place in the effort to find violation of the Equivalence Principle. The following are of interest:
It is often claimed that gravity varies by location on a larger scale. An assessment finds that the experiments either do not show variations, show unexpected results, or are contradicted by other experiments. See Variations in Gravity
Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics

According to the model of the Universal Accelerator the earth is accelerating upwards. We are pinned to the surface of the earth as a mechanical function of this acceleration. This is what creates "gravity" as experienced on earth.
There are numerous pieces of evidence that the earth is accelerating upwards. One of the primary proofs for the Universal Accelerator is the fact that bodies fall without inertial resistance. It is an unexplained coincidence that Inertial Mass is exactly equal to Gravitational Mass. This coincidence has been called "one of the deepest, unsolved mysteries that exists in fundamental physics" [1] and is a question which has vexed science for hundreds of years. Not only is it a conundrum that the Inertial Mass laws should equal out for Gravitational Mass, but the strong form of the equivalence principle declares that all laws of physics are the same. Why does the physics of gravity behave exactly as if the earth were accelerating upwards? The Universal Accelerator answers this long-standing mystery, which has baffled generations of scientists, by positing that the earth is accelerating upwards.
Other pieces of evidence range from the fact that, despite great effort, the mechanism for gravity has not been discovered, the point that the current theories of gravity cannot explain much, vertical light velocity experiments, to empirical proofs.
There are two ways of thinking about mass. According to inertial mass an object’s mass is its “resistance” to being moved, this being greater the more massive it is. The other way to think of mass comes from gravity: According to gravitational mass , the force of gravity experienced between two masses, such as an apple and the Earth, is proportional to the product of their masses divided by the square of the distance between them. This force causes a falling apple to accelerate. If, and only if, the two definitions of mass are exactly the same, the gravitational acceleration doesn’t depend on the amount of mass being accelerated.
Think about it: If, through the laws of inertia, a heavier mass has greater resistance to being moved, why should gravity accelerate both a bowling ball and a marble at the same rate towards the earth without exhibiting any difference in inertial resistance? Any body that is being pulled or pushed through space should be subject to the laws of inertia. Bodies of a greater mass experience more inertial resistance than bodies of a lesser mass. It takes more force to move a greater mass through space. So why should both a bowling ball and a marble be pulled through space at the same rate?
We read the following introduction ( Archive ) from a paper on the subject of the  Equivalence Principle in Quantum Mechanics; emphasis is theirs:
“ Imagine that you are stationary , and standing on the surface of the earth. Gravity feels like a force that is holding your gravitational mass to the earth’s surface. Yet when you are standing in a rocket undergoing accelerated motion (far from gravitational fields, moving with an acceleration of 1 g), the principle of equivalence tells us that there is an identical force exerted against the rocket floor by your inertial mass. However, this force is now caused by your dynamic accelerated motion through empty space. While standing on the earth, however, you were definitely not in motion. Why should there be such a deep connection between what appears to be two completely different physical phenomena: a static force of gravity with no apparent motion, and a dynamic force due to the accelerated motion of your mass? In other words, why should you weigh the same in the rocket as you do on the earth?
The principle of equivalence encompasses this strange ‘coincidence’ , and is one of the founding postulates of general relativity theory. In it’s stronger form, it states that all the laws of physics are the same in the above thought experiment. When stated in it’s weaker form, it implies that objects of different mass fall at the same rate of acceleration in a uniform gravity field, and that only laws of motion of physics are the same .
Equivalence also means that the inertial mass, i.e. the mass defined by Newton’s law of motion: m i = F i / g is exactly equal to the gravitational mass, which is mass defined by a completely different law given by Newton’s universal gravitational law: m g = F g r 2 / GM (where m i and m g are the inertial and gravitational mass of an object, F i and F g are the inertial and gravitational forces exerted on the object, g is the acceleration of the object, M is the mass of the earth, r is the distance from earth’s center, and G is Newton’s universal gravitational constant). Newton was well aware of this coincidence of mass equivalence, which we refer to here as the Newtonian mass equivalence principle.
The equivalence principle demands that that m i = m g . Why should this be true in our universe? It has been about 85 years since the discovery of the Einstein equivalence principle, and hundreds of years since the discovery of Newton’s mass equivalence principle. Yet, it is still not understood why inertial mass exists in the first place, or why a mass opposes acceleration with a back acting inertial force. More importantly, it is also not known why there are two totally different physical definitions for inertial and gravitational mass (instead of just one).
Furthermore, masses can have different temperatures (and therefore different energy content), and may be composed of different materials like lead, wood, water. Again, why should m i = m g , no matter what the material composition and the energy content that a mass may contain? In short, the principle of equivalence is one of the deepest, unsolved mysteries that exists in fundamental physics today! ”
A Globebusters episode discusses the Universal Accelerator as held by the Flat Earth Society. The team looks at a PBS video which states that it was Albert Einstein who came up with the idea of an upwardly accelerating earth. Runtime: 14m30s
( Archive )
Video References:
Einstein's argument in the video is that Newtonian Gravity is curious in that it operates as if the earth were accelerating upwards. There are too many coincidences with Newton's gravity, Einstein says. It makes more sense if the earth is accelerating upwards.
Firstly, according to Newtonian Gravity, all objects move at the same rate towards the earth uniformly. That is its defining feature, and this operates suspiciously as if the earth were accelerating upwards.
Secondly, objects in free fall experience an opposite "fake" force of gravity of the same magnitude to the reverse of inertial laws, in which they are exactly weightless. Another astronomical coincidence. Einstein says that the idea that the object is stationary and the earth is accelerating into it is the best conclusion and the best way to make sense of Newton's Gravity.
The Flat Earth concept comes in because it's not possible for the surface of the Round Earth model to continuously accelerate upwards. An upwardly accelerating surface suggests that the earth is flat.
The video presenter further states that seven years after coming up with the Equivalence Principle Einstein ends up adapting his upwardly accelerating earth theory to the Round Earth model by using non-Euclidean bending space to achieve the accelerating earth illusion of gravity on a Round Earth. The end of the video says that Gravity is an illusion in GR. The author clarifies that "it turns out that inertial frames in curved space-time can do almost anything they want". Under the space-bending schema of General Relativity the arc of a basketball makes a "straight line path" to its destination. It is the environment (space) that moves into the basketball, simulating an accelerating earth.
There is an offhand comment in the video from the Newtonians that falling bodies would fall towards each other, since they are falling towards the center of a presumably round earth. However, it should be noted that this has not been met with experiment.
The Eöt-Wash Group , who have performed numerous highly sensitive Equivalence Principle tests, states the following ( Archive ):
“ We could imagine two apples floating on either side of the person; as the elevator approached the earth, the apples would approach each other. This happens because their paths, both toward the center of the earth, eventually converge. But this is not an effect that can be detected in a local experiment. ”
A feature article from New Scientist declares that the mysterious equivalence principle coincidence is one of the primary problems holding back the progress of physics.
Sacrificing Einstein: Relativity’s keystone has to go ( Archive ) 16 January 2013
Our hopes of finding a theory of everything depend on upsetting a balance that Einstein cherished
“ COINCIDENCE is not generally something scientists have much truck with. If two things are genuinely unrelated, there is little further of interest to be said. If the coincidence keeps turning up, however, there must be some deeper underlying link. Then it is the job of science to tease out what it is and so explain why there was no coincidence in the first place.
That makes it rather odd that a large chunk of modern physics is precariously balanced on a whopping coincidence.
This coincidence is essential to the way we view and define mass. It is so fundamental to the world’s workings that most of us encounter its consequences every day without giving them another thought. Yet it has vexed some of the best minds in physics for centuries. Galileo and Newton grappled with it, and ended up just accepting it, rather than understanding it. Einstein went one better: he declared it a principle of nature. He went on to use this “equivalence principle” as the fundament of his general theory of relativity, still our best stab at explaining the mysterious force of gravity.
But there is a problem. If we want to find some bigger, better theory that can unify gravity with the other forces that dictate the world’s workings, the equivalence principle cannot stay. We must either unmask this coincidence – or radically rethink how physics can progress from here. ”
Galileo Galilei was among the first who experimentally realized that all falling bodies accelerate at the same rate. He is said by some to have dropped two spheres of different masses from the Leaning Tower of Pisa to demonstrate that their time of descent was independent of their mass.
Between 1885 and 1909, Roland von Eötvös used torsion balance experiments to verify the equivalence principle with the accuracy of 11 significant figures. Modern tests in this family have increased it more than 15 significant figures. The Equivalence Principle is continuously tested, in many different scenarios, to the best ability of modern physics.
Professor Brian Cox visits the world's largest vacuum chamber to perform a very illustrative version of Galileo's Drop Test of two bodies of different masses. A bowling ball and a feather are dropped simultaneously in a vacuum chamber to demonstrate the principle of equivalence. Runtime 4m41s
Brian Cox visits the world's biggest vacuum chamber
Notes: Two versions of the experiment are performed, one with air resistance and one without. While the bowling ball and feathers drop at the same rate in the version without air resistance, and in accordance with the equivalence principle, at 2:51 of the final release closeup in the vacuum some of the barbs of the feathers are seen to slightly move when they are released. According to the Equivalence Principle, this would be because, assuming that there is negligible residual atmosphere, the feathers were connected to the earth and were being pulled upwards. At the moment of release the feathers cease being accelerated upwards, are inert in space, and the barbs briefly straighten out to their natural position.
At 4:15, when replaying the short final release closeup in the vacuum, the barbs are seen to move wildly when released. This is an apparent production error, reusing a closeup of the first version of the experiment with air resistance. The video is worth a viewing, despite of this.
Professor Cox says: “ Isaac Newton would say that the ball and the feather fall because there's a force pulling them down - Gravity. But Einstein imagined the scene very differently. The happiest thought of his life was this; The reason the bowling ball and feathers fall together is because they're not falling. They're standing still. There is no force acting on them at all. He reasoned that if you couldn't see the background, there would be no way of knowing that the ball and the feathers were being accelerated towards the Earth. So he concluded: They weren't. ”
Incredibly sensitive experiments have been carried out, showing that the Equivalence Principle even applies on the atomic level.
https://physicsworld.com/a/equivalence-principle-passes-atomic-test/ ( Archive )
“ Physicists in Germany have used an atomic interferometer to perform the most accurate ever test of the equivalence principle at the level of atoms. ”
Study Link: https://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0411052
In 2017 a cryogenic resonator was used to make one of the most sensitive tests for the principle of equivalence and discount spacetime foam.
https://phys.org/news/2017-01-cryogenic-probes-einstein-equivalence-principle.html ( Archive )
“ In their study published in Physical Review Letters, E. Wiens, A.Yu. Nevsky, and S. Schiller at Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf in Germany have used a cryogenic resonator to make some of the most precise measurements yet on the length stability of a solid object. Overall, the results provide further confirmation of Einstein's equivalence principle, which is the foundation on which the theory of general relativity is based on. And in agreement with previous experiments, the researchers found no evidence of spacetime foam.
...One of the most important implications of the null result is that it provides further support for the equivalence principle. Formulated by Einstein in the early 1900s, the equivalence principle is the idea that gravity and acceleration—such as the acceleration a person would feel in an upward-accelerating elevator in space—are equivalent
...The experiment detected virtually no change in frequency, or "zero drift"—more precisely, the mean fractional drift was measured to be about 10 -20 /second, corresponding to a decrease in length that the researchers describe as equivalent to depositing no more than one layer of molecules onto the mirrors of the resonator over a period of 3000 years. This drift is the smallest value measured so far for any resonator. ”
A University of Washington slideshow ( Archive ) goes over the various types of modern equivalence principle tests, including the classic Galileo Drop Test which tests if drop time is equal, the Newton-Bessel Torsion-Balance Tests which tests if periods are equal, and the Eötvös Tests which testes whether angles are equal.
The author states that the Equivalence Principle (EP) is one of the most precisely tested principles in all of physics and, like New Scientist, identifies the mystery of the Equivalence Principle as the prime culprit which holds back breakthroughs in physics. The author concludes:
“ The EP is one of the most precisely tested principles in all of physics with many broad implications.
Gravity is often described as an attraction between masses. However, the Equivalence Principle demands that photons, despite being mass-less, will seem to fall to earth like other bodies; exactly as if the earth were accelerating upwards.
From a University of Oregon lecture ( Archive ) we read:
“ although a simple and common sense assumption, the equivalence principle has strange consequences
such as, photons will be affected by gravity, even though they have zero mass ”
An illustration is provided:

The Michelson-Morley Experiment was a famous experiment designed to measure the velocity of light, and which was historically performed on the horizontal. The Michelson-Morley Experiment has popularly reported no difference in the velocity of light in any horizontal direction.
Of interest, in recent years there have been a number of interesting vertical Michelson-Morley experiments which have asserted to detect a difference in light velocity when the interferometer device was inverted vertically. Discussion of these experiments are ongoing. Typical criticism of these experiments are that the components might be affected by stresses of 'gravity' when rotated into the vertical position. Various experimenters have since sought to mitigate concerns by designing the experiment specifically around such considerations.
The following is one such carefully designed mitigation: Redefining Gravity: Field Vs. Flow ( Archive )
The author states:
“ From the results summarized above, it is inevitable to deduce that light travels in a different manner   vertically, than it does horizontally. ...this exclusively implies that space flows into earth or in other words, earth sucks the space around it. ”
In several instances the author describes it as an "accelerated flow". The author encourages repeats of the experiments.
Prof. A. Zielinski, who is listed at the bottom of the following page to be a member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, the International Scientists' Club, and is a Quantum Electrodynamics researcher, maintains that ( Archive ):
“ The assumption of Michelson and Morley that aether was uniform and at rest in space, was a fundamental error [1,2]. Had Michelson and Morley pointed their interferometer in a vertical plane, they would have concluded that the earth is moving in a perpendicular direction to the surface of the earth into space. A worldwide verification of their experiment would have indicated that the earth is moving everywhere simultaneously in a vertical direction into space, which is, of course, not possible. ”
In the article Prof. Zielinski proceeds to provide interesting theories of the phenomenon for the Round Earth model. Zielinski is listed as a professor (p.2) on a committee of the International Scientists' Club.
The Pound-Rebka experiment and Pound-Rebka-Snyder experiments are optical tests of the Equivalence Principle, where light redshifts or blueshifts when traveling vertically upwards or downwards. Like with the previous section, light behaves differently when traveling upwards or downwards. In General Relativity ( Archive ) by Prof. Benjamin Crowell, its author explains that the experiment is a test of the Equivalence Principle:
“ The Pound-Rebka Experiment
The 1959 Pound-Rebka experiment at Harvard was one of the first high-precision, relativistic tests of the equivalence principle to be carried out under controlled conditions ”
From Special and General Relativity ( Archive ) by Norman K Glendenning on p.28 we read an analogy with an upwardly accelerating spaceship:
“ One can also see the role of the equivalence principle by considering a pulse of light emitted over a distance h along the axis of a spaceship in uniform acceleration g in outer space. The time taken for the light to reach the detector is t = h (we use units G = c = 1). The difference in velocity of the detector acquired during the light travel time is v = gt = gh, the Doppler shift z in the detected light. This experiment, carried out in the gravity-free environment of a spaceship whose rockets produce an acceleration g, must yield the same result for the energy shift of the photon in a uniform gravitational field f according to the equivalence principle. The Pound-Rebka-Snyder experiments can therefore be regarded as an experimental proof of the equivalence principle. ”
The Pound-Rebka-Snyder experiments are the same 1959 experiment, conducted with an additional researcher, which has been improved and repeated over the years to increasing precision ( Archive ).
Summarily, light will be redshifted or blueshifted when traveling upwards or downwards because "gravity" operates exactly as if the earth were accelerating upwards. When light is traveling downwards from a light source on the ceiling to a detector on the ground, the earth is rising quicker into the photons and will cause a blueshift (its frequency will increase). When light is traveling upwards from the ground to a detector on the ceiling, the detector on the ceiling is moving away from the photons and they will redshift (frequency will decrease).

Left: Light moving downwards - Blueshifted Right: Light moving upwards - Redshifted
( Source ) ( Archive )
In connection with the above, in the following Redshift-Blueshift Doppler Shift of Light diagram  we can see that when a body that emits light is receding from you it would cause a red shift, and when is approaching you quicker it will cause a blue shift:

( Source ) ( Archive )
The Doppler Effect principle is used in a policeman's radar gun to measure speed and acceleration. A policeman's radar gun can use doppler shift to determine whether an object is accelerating away or towards you.
https://copradar.com/chapts/chapt3/ch3d1.html ( Archive
“ Police microwave radars all use the Doppler Principle to measure speed. The radar transmits a continuous microwave signal and simultaneously measures the echo that is frequency shifted proportional to speed, the Doppler Shift. The frequency shift is measured in cycles per second and has unit dimensions of Hertz (Hz).
...Microwave signals travel at the speed of light but still obey the Doppler Principle. Microwave radars receive a Doppler frequency shifted reflection from a moving object. Frequency is shifted higher for approaching objects, and lower for receding objects. The frequency shift is proportional to speed. ”

In the Pound–Rebka Experiment when the light suspended on a ceiling travels downwards towards the upwardly moving floor the frequency shifts higher (blueshifts), and when the light source is on the floor shining upwards at the upwardly moving ceiling the frequency is shifted lower (redshifts), just as would happen if the building were sitting on an upwardly accelerating earth. Light behaves differently when moving upwards than downwards.
Gravitational Time Dilation is predicted by the Equivalence Principle, which suggests that two clocks at different altitudes will seem to measure time at different rates when compared to each other.
The Five Ages of the Universe: Inside the Physics of Eternity By Fred C. Adams, PhD and Prof. Greg Laughlin
On p.116 of The Five Ages of the Universe ( Archive ), its authors describe gravitational time dilation by giving an analogy of an upwardly accelerating rocket in space which contains a clock attached to the ceiling and an astronaut sitting on the floor of the rocket with another clock. The astronaut on the floor first observes his own clock, and then observes the ceiling clock:
“ however, he observes that the ceiling clock is running faster. The ceiling clock sends a tone (in the form of a radio wave) down to the floor. Because the floor is accelerating upwards, it intercepts the radio wave sooner than if the rocket were merely coasting along. If the acceleration continues, subsequent tones also arrive earlier than expected. In the viewpoint of the astronaut on the floor, the ceiling clock is broadcasting its time intervals at an increased rate, and is running fast compared to the floor clock.
According to the equivalence principle, the phenomenon of mismatched clock rates, which occurs in response to the acceleration of a rocket, also occurs in a uniform gravitational field. The equivalence principle therefore insists on a seemingly bizarre conclusion. Two clocks at different heights above Earth's surface must measure the flow of time at different rates. This strange behavior is an intrinsic feature of gravity. The variation of the flow of time within a gravitational field is entirely independent of the mechanism used to measure time. Atomic clocks, quartz watches, and biological rhythms all experience the passage of time to be dilated or compressed in the same manner. ”
The authors explain that time dilation should be a natural consequence in an upwardly accelerating rocket, and acknowledge that its application to gravity on earth is "strange" and "bizarre".
Time dilation at different altitudes has been confirmed to match the predictions of the Equivalence Principle to various high elevations. See: Gravitational Time Dilation
Aside from bizarre experiments and massive coincidence, one may reason that the earth is accelerating upwards simply because that is what we observe it to be doing.
In contrast to the mechanism of other gravitational contenders, the mechanism of the upward acceleration of the earth is directly observed and experienced. Consider the following experiments:
To the rationalist the above experiments might appear to be futile, but to the empiricist, the fact that one mechanism is observed and not others is grave. While the proposed mechanisms of "graviton puller particles" and "bending space" versions of gravity in Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity, which Scientific American describes as 'whooping coincidence', provide equivalent, if absurd, explanations to the results of the above experiments, those things are completely undiscovered and unobserved, and so, are decidedly less empirical. We can see that the earth moves upwards, while we must imagine that there are hypothetical puller particles or odd properties to space. The above results and interpretations of the experiments apply not only to our human experience, but to our most sophisticated man-made instruments as well.
See Versus Imagine
In order to argue that the above experiments can also be explained as "falling" we must imagine something invisible that pulls. Some have criticized this concept on philosophical grounds as "spooky action at a distance," in which an object can be moved, changed, or otherwise affected without being physically touched (as in mechanical contact) by another object. Effects such as magnetism have a physical property produced by the motion of an electrical charge, resulting in attractive and repulsive forces between objects. However, no such physical field has been discovered for gravity. Efforts to quantize gravity and unite it with the forces in physics have been thus far unsuccessful.
We can imagine many invisible explanations and mechanisms for the mysterious pulling phenomenon of gravity, each which incorporates the mystical equivalence principle, but they will be completely hypothetical and frivolous. None are as strong as a pushing mechanism that we can directly observe and experience, in which the earth and bodies it accelerates into are physically pushed by mechanical contact. In contrast to its opposition, which are entirely unobserved and unexperienced by any man or machine, the mechanism of the upwardly accelerating earth can be directly observed and experienced by all.
The power source for the Universal Accelerator is beneath the earth and the earth's possible sub or super-structures, pushing it upwards, and is thus, not experienced. The place to detect it would be beneath the earth. It is also possible that the power source is located is outside of the universe, pushing it through a larger meta-universe. In any case, the power source is located beyond our vicinity and we feel only the inertial effects that are translated to us. The power source for gravity, which allows mass to pull mass, however, should be all around us, and its mystery inexcusable. Why should something that is allegedly all around us be undetectable by all of science?
State-of-the-art Physics has dedicated itself to finding a slight inequality in the Equivalence Principle. Why does gravity behave exactly, on all physical levels in laboratory experiments, as if the earth were accelerating upwards? It is widely expected that unveiling this deep mystery would lead to a profound breakthrough in physics, usher in a new scientific revolution, and give fundamental insight into the workings of gravity and the forces.
The Flat Earth Society proposes that there is no profound and mysterious coincidence. These exacting and increasingly sophisticated tests speak to, not an increasingly mysterious answer, but to an increasingly obvious and apparent one. An upwardly accelerating earth is the most natural conclusion, the best explanation, and is dutifully supported by experimental evidence of the highest caliber. Any contradicting form of gravity will, therefore, need to answer for the stated coincidences.
If an object is being pushed or pulled through space, then that object is subject to the laws of inertia. Pushing a marble down the street is much easier than pushing a bowling ball. A bowling ball has more inertial resistance. Any body being pushed or pulled through space must exhibit inertial resistance.  Again, it is asked that, since a heavier object has greater resistance to being moved through space via the laws of inertia, how is it that two objects of significantly different masses are pushed or pulled though space, towards the earth, at the same rate and without any sort of resistive effect? How does gravity know to impart the required amount of energy to make all bodies fall at the same rate?
Further, perhaps even more extraordinary, as per the strong equivalence principle , are we to believe that all physical laws , some very different to each other — electrodynamics, electromagnetics, fluid dynamics, buoyancy, chemical kinetics, &c. — are all perfectly compensated for under their respective paradigms and laws, as exemplified with the inertial laws above, to justify why gravity operates exactly as if the earth were accelerating upwards? This "strange coincidence" is certainly deserving of answers.
It is often claimed that gravity varies by location on a larger scale than the laboratory tests. An assessment finds that the experiments either do not show variations, show unexpected results, or are contradicted by other experiments. See Variations in Gravity
Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics

The Variations in Gravity are the supposed variations to gravity due to either the variations in strength of the gravitational field of the earth or due to the presence of masses such as hills or celestial bodies. It is often stated that the strength of gravity decreases with altitude or that the gravity of the Sun and Moon pulls upon the earth's surface. However, the experiments either do not show variation or the few effects suggesting variations are questionable, contradicted, and may be attributed to other causes.
It is alleged that the Sun and Moon exerts a gravitational pull upon the earth. Very sensitive torsion balance experiments have been conducted over a period of 24 hours, showing that experiments are not affected by external sources as to cause a violation of the equivalence principle. External gravity sources, such as from the Sun, are unable be felt.
See Also:
It has been found in experiments on various ranges that "gravity" does not deviate from the Universality of Free Fall or the Equivalence Principle. The Equivalence Principle is a principle of nature which says that 'gravity' behaves as if the experiment were conducted on an Earth or in a container which was accelerating upwards. Supposedly only a 'local' concept, experimenters have tested this concept at various scales without violation of this principle.
It is alleged that gravity varies by latitude due to a combination of the effects of the rotation of the earth and the bulging mass at the equator. Experiments performed with scales exposed to the atmosphere have shown that weight increases by a fraction of one percent near the polar areas, as compared to areas near the warmer equator. However, weight is also affected by factors outside of 'gravity'. It is also related to a buoyancy related to pressure, humidity, air viscosity, temperature, etc, which exist differently in different locations, and which may contribute in complex ways to the readings of the scale.
In contradiction to this, experiments conducted with sensitive clocks at different latitudes show that the expected time dilation due to velocity does not occur in response to the different latitudinal velocities of the earth.
The theory of the universal gravitation of mass leads to the expectation that the mountain ranges should produce a larger gravitational pull than the plains, owing to the greater bulk mass in the area. However, gravity measurements show that the mountains are associated with negative gravity anomalies.
Mainstream materials on the gravimeter device used to study the Earth's gravity show that it is not studying gravity directly. The device is described as studying density variations in the subseismic band assumed to be caused to gravity, where phenomena such as the tides are observed. Gravimeters can be double purposed as seismometers, seismometers can be double purposed as gravimeters, and the gravity anomalies are associated with the seismic zones.

=== https://wiki.tfes.org/Gravitational_Time_Dilation ===

Gravitational time dilation is a phenomenon in which the difference of elapsed time manifests between two events as measured by observers situated at varying distances from the Earth. Time is seen to dilate in accord with the Equivalence Principle , which predicts that all physical effects which would occur in an upwardly accelerating rocket ship should also happen in a gravitational field. Since the time dilation of clocks would occur at different elevations inside of an upwardly accelerating rocket, it must occur at different elevations in the Earth's gravitational field as well. Supposedly only a 'local' effect, the Equivalence Principle and its uniform nature [1] has been confirmed over various elevations.
From p.8 of Cosmological Physics ( Archive ) by John A. Peacock, PhD. ( bio ) we read the following:
GRAVITATIONAL TIME DILATION
“ Many of the important features of general relativity can be obtained via rather simple arguments that use the equivalence principle. The most famous of these is the thought experiment that leads to gravitational time dilation, illustrated in figure 1.1. Consider an accelerating frame. which is conventionally a rocket of height h, with a clock mounted on the roof that regularly disgorges photons towards the floor. If the rocket accelerates upwards at g, the floor acquires a speed v = gh / c in the time taken for a photon to travel from roof to floor. There will thus be a blueshift in the frequency of received photons, given by Δv / v = gh / c^2 , and it is easy to see that the rate of reception of photons will increase by the same factor.
Now, since the rocket can be kept accelerating for as long as we like, and since photons cannot be stockpiled anywhere, the conclusion of an observer on the floor of the rocket is that in a real sense the clock on the roof is running fast. When the rocket stops accelerating, the clock on the roof will have gained a time Δt by comparison with an identical clock kept on the floor. Finally, the equivalence principle can be brought in to conclude that gravity must cause the same effect. Noting that ΔΦ = gh is the difference in potential between roof and floor, it is simple to generalize this to Δt / t = ΔΦ / c^2 ”

“ Figure 1.1. Imagine you are in a box in free space far from any source of gravitation. If the box is made to accelerate ‘upwards’ and has a clock that emits a photon every second mounted on its roof, it is easy to see that you will receive photons more rapidly once the box accelerates (imagine yourself running into the line of oncoming photons) . Now, according to the equivalence principle, the situation is exactly equivalent to the second picture in which the box sits at rest on the surface of the Earth. Since there is nowhere for the excess photons to accumulate, the conclusion has to be that clocks above us in a gravitational field run fast. ”
For further clarification of why upwards acceleration into a line of incoming clock signals affects the perception of time, as in the previous left side example, we may use an example of water droplets.
Imagine that you are on one end of a spacecraft under zero gravity. A line of water droplets is traveling from the far end of the spaceship towards you, hitting you at a rate of 1 drop per second.

You then accelerate towards the drops. Will you experience the water droplets hitting you at a rate quicker than 1 drop per second?

When you accelerate into droplets you perceive their sequence of events quicker. We see that the physical act of accelerating into an incoming line of water droplets would cause them to appear to increase at a quicker rate than if you were not accelerating into them. This is the cause of time dilation in the previous example of an astronaut accelerating into the incoming clock signals within a rocket.
Ultra-precise atomic clocks have confirmed that time dilates at different elevations on a personal scale.
NIST Pair of Aluminum Atomic Clocks Reveal Einstein's Relativity at a Personal Scale ( Archive )
“ BOULDER, Colo. – Scientists have known for decades that time passes faster at higher elevations—a curious aspect of Einstein's theories of relativity that previously has been measured by comparing clocks on the Earth's surface and a high-flying rocket.
Now, physicists at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) have measured this effect at a more down-to-earth scale of 33 centimeters, or about 1 foot, demonstrating, for instance, that you age faster when you stand a couple of steps higher on a staircase.
Described in the Sept. 24 issue of Science,* the difference is much too small for humans to perceive directly—adding up to approximately 90 billionths of a second over a 79-year lifetime—but may provide practical applications in geophysics and other fields.
Similarly, the NIST researchers observed another aspect of relativity—that time passes more slowly when you move faster—at speeds comparable to a car travelling about 20 miles per hour, a more comprehensible scale than previous measurements made using jet aircraft. ”
Paper: Optical Clocks and Relativity ( Archive )
Atomic clocks were compared between locations at the bottom and the top of a mountain, confirming the dilation of time.
Project GREAT 2016a -- Hawking, Einstein, and Time Dilation on Mt Lemmon ( Archive )
“ Conceptually, the experiment is very simple. We take one accurate clock the top of the mountain and we take another accurate clock to a hotel at the base of the mountain and let them sit there for a day. Then we bring the clocks together again and compare. If time dilation is false then the clocks should still agree. If time dilation is real then we would expect the clock that was at the hotel to be a little behind the clock that was at the summit. ”

“ At a minimum two clocks are needed, but having multiple clocks and redundant power greatly reduces chances of failure. All six were synchronized and carried in my car for a couple of days. Then we left 3 of them at the top of the mountain, storing them in the astronomer's dormitory, and kept the other 3 in the car as we drove back down to a hotel in Tucson. We waited a day, and then drove back up and compared the clocks.
The elevation of the clocks at the hotel was 775 m (about 2540 feet) and the elevation of clocks at the summit was 2780 m (about 9120 feet). So the difference in elevation was 2.00 km (about 6580 feet). The length of time the clocks were separated was about 23 hours. The formula gh/c² predicts a time dilation of about 18 ns (nanoseconds).
Now, these clocks are not without error. Even atomic clocks are not perfect. But they are extremely well-designed, and they were all tested prior to the experiment, and found to have a timing error of approximately ± 2 ns per day. Since we are comparing imperfect clock(s) at the base with imperfect clock(s) at the summit the experiment has some inherent error. The key is to design the experiment so that the effect being measured (gravitational time dilation) is at least ten times greater than the inherent fluctuations in the clocks themselves.
In general, the higher you go, the longer you stay, the better the clocks, the more clocks you use, then the more certain the results will be. In this experiment the (preliminary) measured value of 21 ns is within expectations and close to the predicted value of 18 ns. So Hawking is genius, Einstein is happy, time dilation is real, PBS got quality footage, and a good time was had by all. ”
A similar experiment showing time dilation on a mountain was conducted in 1977 by Briatore and Leschiutta to about 11,500 feet on Plateau Rosa , afferming that the effect meets the principle of equivalence.
According to the mainstream narrative it is claimed that in 1976 the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration engaged in a joint project to test the Equivalence Principle by comparing the difference of time dilation at high altitudes and the surface of the earth. A ballistic (sub-orbital) rocket was sent to an altitude of 10,000 km (6,200 mi) on an elliptical trajectory over the Atlantic Ocean before falling back down to earth. At a great height an atomic clock on board the rocket was compared to an atomic clock on the surface of the earth, confirming that time dilates in accordance with the uniform nature of the Equivalence Principle.
http://research.omicsgroup.org/index.php/Gravity_Probe_A ( Archive )
Gravity Probe A
“ Gravity Probe A (GP-A) was a space-based experiment to test the equivalence principle, a feature of Einstein's theory of relativity. It was performed jointly by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The experiment sent a hydrogen maser, a highly accurate frequency standard, into space to measure with high precision the rate at which time passes in a weaker gravitational field.
~
The experiment was a test of a major fallout of Einstein's general relativity, the equivalence principle. The equivalence principle states that a reference frame in a uniform gravitational field is indistinguishable from a reference frame that is under uniform acceleration. Further, the equivalence principle predicts that phenomenon of different time flow rates, present in a uniformly accelerating reference frame, will also be present in a stationary reference frame that is in a uniform gravitational field.
~
The probe was launched on June 18, 1976 from the NASA-Wallops Flight Center in Wallops Island, Virginia. The probe was carried via a Scout rocket, and attained a height of 10,000 km (6,200 mi), while remaining in space for 1 hour and 55 minutes, as intended. It returned to Earth by splashing down into the Atlantic Ocean.
~
The objective of the Gravity Probe A experiment was to test the validity of the equivalence principle. The equivalence principle was a key component of Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity, and states that the laws of physics are the same regardless of whether you consider a uniformly accelerating reference frame or a reference frame that is acted upon by uniform gravitational field.
The equivalence principle can be understood by picturing a rocket ship in two scenarios. First, imagine a rocket ship that is at rest on the Earth's surface; objects in the rocket ship are being accelerated downward at 9.81 m/s². Now, imagine a rocket ship that has escaped Earth's gravitational field and is accelerating upwards at a constant 9.81 m/s² due to thrust from its rockets; objects in the rocket ship that are dropped will fall to the floor with an acceleration of 9.81 m/s². This example shows that a uniformly accelerating reference frame is indistinguishable from a gravitational reference frame.
~
The 100 kg Gravity Probe A spacecraft housed the atomic hydrogen maser system that ran throughout the mission. Maser is an acronym for microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation, and is similar to a laser, as it produces coherent electromagnetic waves in the microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum (as opposed to lasers which produce light in the visible or ultraviolet region). The probe was launched nearly vertically upward to cause a large change in the gravitational potential seen by the maser, reaching a height of 10,000 km (6,200 mi). At this height, relativity predicted a clock should run 4.5 parts in 10 10 faster than one on the Earth .
~
The experiment was thus able to test the equivalence principle. Gravity Probe A confirmed the prediction that deeper in the gravity well the time flows slower,[4] and the observed effects matched the predicted effects to an accuracy of about 70 parts per million. ”
Additional reference to the 'uniform gravitational field' of the Equivalence Principle can be seen on p.8 of How The Universe Works: Introduction To Modern Cosmology ( Archive ):
“ The Gravity Probe A experiment also confirmed another important General Relativity effect: the equivalence principle, which states that the object behaves the same regardless of whether it is uniformly accelerating or placed in a uniform gravitational field. ”
Aeronautics and Space Report of the President - 1976 Activities ( Archive ) contains reference to the device's elliptical flight over the Atlantic Ocean:
June 18 - Gravity Probe A (Red Shift Experiment) - sub-orbital - Scout
“ Objective: To test Einstein’s "equivalence principle," which is the foundation of relativity theory.
Probe: 114-cm long. 96-cm diameter; extremely accurate hydrogen maser atomic clock: support equipment consists of S-band telemetry transponder, battery, and cooling system. Weight: 102kg
Remarks: Launched by NASA into an elliptical flight of one hour and 55 minutes over Atlantic Ocean. Maximum altitude 10,000 km. Data substantially confirmed equivalence aspect of the theory. ”
In the above we saw that a clock on Earth was compared to a clock raised to an elevation of 10,000 km, concluding that the time dilation experienced confirmed the time dilation effect that would happen in a 'uniform gravitational field', per the Equivalence Principle.
According to a Physics Classroom article on gravitational theory, gravity diminishes significantly in that range. With the Earth's supposed radius (R) of 6,371 km, at 2R from the center of the Earth, the value of gravity is much different.
https://www.physicsclassroom.com/class/circles/Lesson-3/The-Value-of-g ( Archive )

A table also appears in the article, containing the following paraphrased data up to 10,000 km:
The experimental claims of mainstream science demonstrate that there is difficulty with finding violations of the Equivalence Principle. Experiments with very sensitive equipment show that the uniform nature of the EP is verified to various elevations. If it is claimed that there are variations in gravity, one should be able to directly reference the empirical experiments which show these variations, rather than merely claim or assert that they exist based on rumor or theory.
The few referenced experiments from science history which do claim slight variations of gravity are seen to be conducted in uncontrolled settings (See: Weight Variation by Latitude ). Weight is also affected by factors outside of 'gravity'. It is also related to a buoyancy related to pressure, humidity, air viscosity, temperature, etc, which exist differently in different locations, and which may contribute in complex ways to the readings of the scale. Such experiments must necessarily be controlled from all other known factors which affects the scale, ideally conducted in a vacuum chamber. Experimental evidence otherwise shows resounding agreement with the concept that our Earth is accelerating upwards.
Time Dilation Topics
Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics

Weight Variation by Latitude refers to the claims that scales have measured masses to weigh up to 0.5% less near the equator compared to the polar areas. It is asserted that this is due to a combination of the centrifugal effect from the rotation of the earth and the increased mass at the equator.
Upon assessment of the experiments supporting this, it is found that these experiments are conducted with the scale and test body exposed to the surrounding atmosphere. A scale is calibrated for one area and then taken to another area, uncalibrated. [1] [2] Measures are not taken to isolate the test body and the measuring device from the influences of the environmental atmosphere. Weight is affected by factors other than 'gravity'. Pressure, humidity, and other properties affect scales. It is known that that pressure is greater at the poles and lesser at the equator. [3] It is further known that pressure is greater at lower altitudes near sea level and lesser at higher altitudes. Humidity likewise has a relationship with the latitudes [4] and the altitudes, as well as other interrelated properties such as air viscosity.
Andrew Huszczuk, Ph.D., writes ( Archive ):
“ Would you take a medication knowing that a pharmacy used an uncalibrated scale to weigh its ingredients? Would you board a plane knowing that the fuel or altitude gauges are not calibrated at frequent intervals?
In these and thousands of other applications scientific bases and rules of metrology must be obeyed to assure chaos-free operation of modern societies. To scrutinize performance of measuring devices a process of calibration must be carried out by means of applying a known standard and getting back a correct reading. ”
From Drift in Measurements with Analytical Balances ( Archive ) we read:
“ Pharmaceutical laboratories and bioscience research institutes make extensive use of analytical balances that are highly sensitive. These analytical balances are greatly affected by their environment and also by the way they are installed and handled. ”
One precision scale manufacture lists many factors ( Archive ) which can affect a scale:
Factors That Can Affect Your Scale’s Accuracy
“ Differences in air pressure – Scales can provide inaccurate measurements if the air pressure from the calibration environment is different than the operating environment. ”
If the air pressure from the calibration environment is different than the operating environment, it will affect the scale. Also listed on the page are temperature and humidity which can affect the operation of a precision scale.
Standardscale.com says ( Archive ):
How does the environment affect weighing on a lab balance?
“ The environment surrounding a balance is vital if you are to maintain the manufacturer's stated performance ratings. Really, the manufacturer doesn’t matter in this regard, as a bad environment will adversely affect any balance. There are many influences to consider and to remove, as far as is possible, from the area surrounding the balance. ”
The Industrial Scale Company tells us ( Archive ):
Sources of Error in Weighing Instruments
“ Environmental Factors – A scale’s accuracy and precision are highly dependent on the environment in which it is installed. ”
Inconsistent scale readings are also readily seen at home in bathroom scales. If left uncalibrated, the reading can vary.
Can I Trust My Bathroom Scale? ( Archive )
“ A dietician who weighed herself 15 times over the course of a day found that she’d “gained” seven pounds. ”
On the topic of uncalibrated scale drift precisionscale.com portrays a 0.5% variance as small, and gives it as an example of why calibration is necessary.
https://precisionscale.com/scale-calibration/ ( Archive )
Understanding the Importance of Scale Calibration
“ In more complex terms, scale calibration involves the process of comparing a known standard, such as a calibration service’s certified weights, to the results given by the unit that is being tested (your company’s scales). Such a procedure ensures the accuracy of the unit being tested. When your business relies on accuracy of weights to run and operate smoothly and protect profits, calibration of your scales is not negotiable. It is an absolute must and will also ensure that your business is adhering to industry standards and Canadian laws and regulations if you use the weights and measurements to calculate truck loads.
Why Is Calibrating Your Business’s Scales So Important?
While you may not realize it, your business’s scales and the accuracy they produce have a direct impact on your company’s bottom line. If your scales are off, your profits can be off as well. For example, let’s say that your business deals in a very expensive powdered cleaning product. If the product cost is $10 per pound and on average you weigh 1,000 pounds of product per day, the total value of product weighed each day is $10,000.
Now, let’s say that your scale is out of balance by just 0.5 percent. That discrepancy will cost you approximately $50 per day, or $1,000 a month. Unless your company is in the position to literally throw away $1,000 a month ($12,000 a year), then it becomes very apparent why scale calibration is a necessity. In fact, keeping these numbers in mind, one can actually say that such a service is actually an insurance policy protecting your business’s bottom line, rather than just another routine business expense. ”
In the EU if a scale is not calibrated before use after repositioning then it is not considered to be a legitimate measurement device. From a precision scale manual we see:
https://www.soehnle-professional.com/documents/all/406/Manual_9437_EN.pdf ( Archive )

The precision scale manufacturer Kern conducted a public test of the variation of weight by latitude, showing that weight changed when a resin composite gnome and one of its precision scales were sent to members of the public at different latitudes:
Website: http://gnome-experiment.com/ ( Archive )

The scale was calibrated in Germany and then sent to different areas:
https://www.chemistryworld.com/news/gnomadic-experiment/4924.article ( Archive )
“ Kern the gnome and a Kern and Sohn balance, calibrated at the firm’s laboratory in Balingen, Germany, are travelling around the world to anyone who requests a visit in a specially designed flight case. Gloves and cleaning implements also come along for the ride, so the mass of the gnome isn’t altered by dirt or over enthusiastic cleaning.
Several factors affect the gravitational field at different locations on the Earth, for example the closer Kern gets to the equator, the less he should weigh because the velocity of the Earth’s spin at the equator (1670km/hr) counteracts the force of gravity by up to 0.3% . This weight loss will also be increased by the equatorial bulge that means Kern would be further from the centre of our planet and gravity is proportional to the inverse square of the distance between two objects. ”
Long weigh from gnome: The bizarre experiment where a garden ornament travels the world to measure gravity ( Archive )
“ Kern travels in a reinforced case containing himself and a Kern EWB 2.4 Scale calibrated according to local gravity in Balingen, Germany , to ensure any weight change he encounters on his travels shows up. ”
Members of the public were instructed to place the gnome onto the scale and to record their results:

The Spring Scale Experiment shows a similar methodology of calibrating in one area and taking to another:
http://physicstasks.eu/930/spring-scale-on-the-pole-and-on-the-equator ( Archive )

“ We calibrated a spring scale on the North Pole and then we moved the scale to the Equator.
Does the spring scale give the same readings as on the pole? Give reasons. ”
The book Practical calculations for engineers ( Archive ) describes the same method:
“ Suppose such a spring balance be made and calibrated in London by suspended weights which are mutiples or sub-multiples of the point weight. Then if the balance and the standard pound weights were taken to different latitudes, it would be found that the balance would show increasing readings for the same weight in passing from the equator to the poles. ”
The following sources explain that air pressure has a relationship with latitude, being lower near the equator and greater near the poles:
https://www.pmfias.com/pressure-belts-pressure-systems-equatorial-low-sub-tropical-high-sub-polar-low-polar-high/ ( Archive )
World Distribution of Sea Level Pressure
“ The atmosphere exerts a pressure of 1034 gm per square cm at sea level. This amount of pressure is exerted by the atmosphere at sea level on all animals, plants, rocks, etc.
Near the equator the sea level pressure is low and the area is known as equatorial low. Along 30° N and 30° S are found the high-pressure areas known as the subtropical highs. Further pole wards along 60° N and 60° S, the low-pressure belts are termed as the sub polar lows. Near the poles the pressure is high and it is known as the polar high. ”
and further down:
“ Polar High Pressure Belt
- The polar highs are small in area and extend around the poles.
- They lie around poles between 80 – 90° N and S latitudes.
Formation
- The air from sub-polar low pressure belts after saturation becomes dry. This dry air becomes cold while moving towards poles through upper troposphere.
- The cold air (heavy) on reaching poles subsides creating a high pressure belt at the surface of earth. ”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polar_High
“ Polar High
The polar highs are areas of high atmospheric pressure around the north and south poles; the north polar high being the stronger one because land gains and loses heat more effectively than sea. The cold temperatures in the polar regions cause air to descend to create the high pressure (a process called subsidence), just as the warm temperatures around the equator cause air to rise to create the low pressure intertropical convergence zone. ”
There is also a world-wide temperature gradient, which may have a direct or indirect relationship on variables of the atmosphere to affect atmospheric buoyancy.
https://www.earthonlinemedia.com/ebooks/tpe_3e/temperature/explaining_global_patterns_temperature.html

Humidity, like temperature and pressure, has a relationship with the equator as well:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humidity#Climate
“ The most humid cities on earth are generally located closer to the equator, near coastal regions. Cities in South and Southeast Asia are among the most humid. Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Jakarta, and Singapore have very high humidity all year round because of their proximity to water bodies and the equator and often overcast weather. ”
When one examines the properties of the air they will find that other elements too are related to pressure, temperature, and humidity; such as air viscosity and thermal diffusivity -- all of which may affect the operation of scales complex ways. If a scale is affected by any of that then those factors should be excluded, ideally in a vacuum chamber experiment which demonstrates the matter empirically, independent of any assumption about the atmosphere. Merely claiming or asserting that there are no factors that affect the device is insufficient. Yet, a search for examples of this experiment conducted in a vaccum chamber finds none.
Any singular assessment appears insufficient. It is due to the complex nature of the air that scale manufacturers and metrologists recommend calibrating often, whether a scale is indoors or outdoors. A company's failure to calibrate its scales in certain fields can result in fines and even legal action. Adopting this basic and reasonable level of scrutiny, an experiment which is based on bringing uncalibrated scales to different environments and then looking for differences of a fraction of one percent of a body's weight must only be questioned for validity.
Of interest, upon reviewing the history of weight changes by latitude we find that the nature of the Earth was modified because the theory did not meet the data. This is the origin of the flattening of the poles.
From Voltaire we see ( Archive ):
“ The celebrated Huygens, by calculating centrifugal forces, had proved that the consequent diminution of weight on the surface of a sphere was not great enough to explain the phenomenon, and that therefore the earth must be a spheroid flattened at the poles. ”
Hence, the theory was changed to fit the result, giving us a round world with flattened poles. However logical a bulging equator is in concept, the ability to change a theory to meet a desired result exists as a fudge factor. Had the results been any more or less different, the theory or associated theories would have been changed to fit those results, either by bulging out the equator more or less to fit the data or by looking for other elements to modify.
In contradiction to an uncontrolled three hundred year old practice of bringing weighing devices to different environments and adapting the theory to fit the results, other situations involving devices which are not affected by atmosphere do not show changes by latitude. See: Time Dilation by Latitude
Change by Latitude Topics
Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics

The Cavendish Experiment , performed in 1797–1798 by British scientist Henry Cavendish, was alleged to be the first experiment to measure the force of gravity between masses in the laboratory. The results of the experiment were used to determine the masses of the Earth and celestial bodies. The Cavendish Experiment is often held up as evidence for the universal attraction of mass, and as a proof for gravity. The experiment involves two spherical lead balls attached to a torsion balance, which is alleged to detect the faint gravitational attraction between the masses.
When institutions have reproduced this experiment with modern methods involving lasers and instruments of the highest precision, however, the detection of gravity has been fraught with difficulty, giving erratic results. Oddly, modern repetitions of the Cavendish Experiment tell us that the readings deviate over ten fold from their expected uncertainties when observed at different times. 1 , 2 It is admitted that the experiment is dominated by effects which are not gravity. 3 , 4
The use of this experiment as demonstration of the universal attraction of mass is further faulted at its premise. This experiment is a matter of observation and interpretation. In this experiment a slight attraction with the force equivalent of the weight of a few cells is observed 5 and conclusions are then made about the strength of gravity for the entire universe. Those observations are used to estimate the masses of the celestial bodies, rather than using the theory of gravity and the size of the earth to determine the amount of attraction which should have been seen in the experiment. It is assumed that the attraction seen must originate from the universal attraction of mass rather than any other cause which could cause attraction with the weight of a few cells at close range. Different values seen in the experiment would produce different conclusions for the masses of the earth and celestial bodies.
Scientific American provides an assessment of a large number of Cavendish Experiments conducted by prestigious laboratories and institutions and explains that, unlike other fundamental forces in physics, gravity cannot be accurately measured.
Puzzling Measurement of "Big G" Gravitational Constant Ignites Debate - Scientific American ( Archive )
“ Gravity, one of the constants of life, not to mention physics, is less than constant when it comes to being measured. Various experiments over the years have come up with perplexingly different values for the strength of the force of gravity, and the latest calculation just adds to the confusion.
The results of a painstaking 10-year experiment to calculate the value of “big G,” the universal gravitational constant, were published this month—and they’re incompatible with the official value of G, which itself comes from a weighted average of various other measurements that are mostly mutually incompatible and diverge by more than 10 times their estimated uncertainties.
The gravitational constant “is one of these things we should know,” says Terry Quinn at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) in Sévres, France, who led the team behind the latest calculation. “It’s embarrassing to have a fundamental constant that we cannot measure how strong it is.”
In fact, the discrepancy is such a problem that Quinn is organizing a meeting in February at the Royal Society in London to come up with a game plan for resolving the impasse. The meeting’s title—“The Newtonian constant of gravitation, a constant too difficult to measure?”—reveals the general consternation. ”
In the article Physicist Jens Gundlach ( bio ) explains that gravity is very hard to measure and would require measuring the force equivalent of the weight of a few human cells on two one-kilogram masses that are one meter apart:
“ Although gravity seems like one of the most salient of nature’s forces in our daily lives, it’s actually by far the weakest, making attempts to calculate its strength an uphill battle. “Two one-kilogram masses that are one meter apart attract each other with a force equivalent to the weight of a few human cells,” says University of Washington physicist Jens Gundlach, who worked on a separate 2000 measurement of big G. “Measuring such small forces on kg-objects to 10-4 or 10-5 precision is just not easy. There are a many effects that could overwhelm gravitational effects, and all of these have to be properly understood and taken into account.” ”
Gundlach explains that there are many effects that could overwhelm the gravitational effects. Static attraction, air viscosity, air particles, static drag, other forces, &c, can easily overcome such gravitational attraction.
“ This inherent difficulty has caused big G to become the only fundamental constant of physics for which the uncertainty of the standard value has risen over time as more and more measurements are made. “Though the measurements are very tough, because G is so much weaker than other laboratory forces, we still, as a community, ought to do better,” says University of Colorado at Boulder physicist James Faller, who conducted a 2010 experiment to calculate big G using pendulums. ”
The article explains that the results are wildly erratic.
“ Through these dual experiments, Quinn’s team arrived at a value of 6.67545 X 10-11 m3 kg-1 s-2. That’s 241 parts per million above the standard value of 6.67384(80) X 10-11 m3 kg-1 s-2, which was arrived at by a special task force of the International Council for Science’s Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) (pdf) in 2010 by calculating a weighted average of all the various experimental values.These values differ from one another by as much as 450 ppm of the constant, even though most of them have estimated uncertainties of only about 40 ppm. “Clearly, many of them or most of them are subject either to serious significant errors or grossly underestimated uncertainties,” Quinn says ”
The values of these sophisticated laboratory experiments differ from one another by as much as 450 ppm of the gravitational constant. The uncertainty for measuring the gravity of the opposite mass with the equipment should be only about 40 ppm, yet the values observed are far more erratic—over ten times their estimated uncertainties.
“ “Either something is wrong with the experiments, or there is a flaw in our understanding of gravity,” says Mark Kasevich, a Stanford University physicist who conducted an unrelated measurement of big G in 2007 using atom interferometry. “Further work is required to clarify the situation.”
If the true value of big G turns out to be closer to the Quinn team’s measurement than the CODATA value, then calculations that depend on G will have to be revised. For example, the estimated masses of the solar system’s planets, including Earth, would change slightly. Such a revision, however, wouldn’t alter any fundamental laws of physics, and would have very little practical effect on anyone’s life, Quinn says. But getting to the bottom of the issue is more a matter of principle to the scientists. “It’s not a thing one likes to leave unresolved,” he adds. “We should be able to measure gravity.” ”
The end sentence is plain in its understanding, admitting that they cannot measure gravity.
From a Forbes piece titled Scientists Admit, Embarrassingly, We Don't Know How Strong The Force Of Gravity Is ( Archive ) by astrophysicist Ethan Siegel, Ph.D. ( bio ), we read the following about the issue:
“ While the other fundamental constants are known to precisions of anywhere between 8 and 14 significant digits, uncertainties are anywhere from thousands to billions of times greater when it comes to G.
The gravitational constant of the Universe, G, was the first constant to ever be measured. Yet more than 350 years after we first determined its value, it is truly embarrassing how poorly known, compared to all the other constants, our knowledge of this one is. We use this constant in a whole slew of measurements and calculations, from gravitational waves to pulsar timing to the expansion of the Universe. Yet our ability to determine it is rooted in small-scale measurements made right here on Earth. The tiniest sources of uncertainty, from the density of materials to seismic vibrations across the globe, can weave their way into our attempts to determine it. Until we can do better, there will be an inherent, uncomfortably large uncertainty anywhere the gravitational phenomenon is important. It's 2018, and we still don't know how strong gravity actually is. ”
We are told that, compared to other fundamental constants, the uncertainties with G are thousands to billions of times greater. We are also told that the strength of gravity for the celestial bodies across the universe are all reliant on this inconsistent experiment.
AIP Review of Scientific Instruments Invited Review Article: Measurements of the Newtonian constant of gravitation, G
“ By many accounts, the Newtonian constant of gravitation G is the fundamental constant that is most difficult to measure accurately. Over the past three decades, more than a dozen precision measurements of this constant have been performed. However, the scatter of the data points is much larger than the uncertainties assigned to each individual measurement ”
From a Futurism Article Is the Gravitational Constant Really a Constant? by astrophysicist Colin Robson ( bio ):
“ So far as we can tell, the gravitational constant has remained constant throughout the entire history of the universe. This has, however, been VERY difficult to prove! Measurements of the gravitational constant over the past 200 years have been erratic. Even as the techniques that we use now are far more advanced and sensitive than were used two centuries ago, the true value of the gravitational constant remains elusive.
In 2013, a group of researchers working out of France took the measurement of the gravitational constant, using the same machine that they’d used some 2 years earlier. Improvements were made on the machine to improve the sensitivity and give a more accurate result. The machine, which uses two independent methods to calculate the constant, averages the results of the two. This, in theory, should help reduce systematic errors. What did they find? A different result!
At first it may seem strange that the gravitational constant is so hard to determine. There are four fundamental forces in the universe:
Gravity is by far the weakest of the four forces, which, may also sound a little strange considering what we see in the universe. When looking out into the cosmos, gravity appears to be the reigning king of all. Gravity is so strong that it causes stars to fuse hydrogen into helium, collapses stellar cores into neutron stars and black holes, creates quasars and dictates the flow of matter within the entire universe.
On a large scale, gravity wins. But, as was previously mentioned, gravity is the weakest of the four forces. The reason for this discrepancy is, as a force, gravity travels further and has a slower fall off. The strongest of the four forces, the Strong Force, becomes almost non-existent at distances outside of a nucleus. What makes gravity stronger in macro circumstances is that it is accumulative. The more matter there is, the more gravity. But still, gravity is weaker. Therefore, when trying to measure it, the other forces can cause systematic errors. It is akin to trying to measure the weight of a feather, outdoors, in a slight breeze, with an old pair of scales. ”
Physics World provides a graphic, showing that the measurements often do not overlap and are spread out across a range of over ten times the estimated uncertainties:
https://physicsworld.com/a/the-lure-of-g/ ( Archive.is )
Figure 1:

“ Low precision alone is enough to keep a metrologist up all night. But in recent years, a much more serious problem has arisen: measurements of big G are in wild disagreement with one another (figure 1). Since the turn of this century, values recorded by some of the best labs in the world have been spread apart by more than 10 times their estimated uncertainties. Something is amiss – yet no-one is quite sure what. “You go over it, and over it, and over it,” says Speake. “And there comes a time when you say, I just can’t think of anything we’ve done wrong.” ”
Terence Quinn ( bio ) is a British physicist who spent many years studying gravity and was emeritus director of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures.
In a Scientific American article Quinn says the errors are significant:
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/puzzling-measurement-of-big-g-gravitational-constant-ignites-debate-slide-show/ ( Archive )
“ These values differ from one another by as much as 450 ppm of the constant, even though most of them have estimated uncertainties of only about 40 ppm. “Clearly, many of them or most of them are subject either to serious significant errors or grossly underestimated uncertainties,” Quinn says ”
Quinn is also quoted in the article as saying that "we should be able to measure gravity":
“ But getting to the bottom of the issue is more a matter of principle to the scientists. “It’s not a thing one likes to leave unresolved,” he adds. “We should be able to measure gravity." ”
If Quinn is stating that we should be able to measure gravity, then this may imply that Quinn does not think that he measured gravity in his years of studying it in the laboratory.
In a Nature article Quinn says that the published range undermines the science of metrology:
https://www.nature.com/articles/nphys3651?proof=t ( Archive )
“ Who needs a more accurate numerical value of G (the current recommended value6 is 6.67408 ± 0.00031 × 10−11 kg−1 m3 s−2)? The short answer is, nobody, for the moment, but being apparently unable to converge on a value for G undermines our confidence in the metrology of small forces. Although it is true that the orbits of the planets depend on the product of G and the mass of the Sun — the structures of all astrophysical objects are determined by the balance of gravity and other forces produced by, for example, gas, photon or degeneracy pressure — ab initio models of the Sun are still an order of magnitude away from predicting a value of G at a level comparable with laboratory determinations. We do not need a value of G to test for departures from the inverse square law or the equivalence principle. There is as yet no prospect of a theory of quantum gravity that would predict a value for G that could be tested by experiment. ”
In the above quote we see a statement that the recommended range undermines their science in the metrology of small forces, showing that he is certainly not endorsing it. Quinn clearly suggests the recommended range is questionable.
Quinn also speaks about about the practical purpose for the such a measurement, in non-cavendish situations and measurements. He is correct that G is not needed for the Equivalence Principle tests. This is something else, showing that gravity does not depart in laboratory experiments from the concept that the Earth is accelerating upwards. The EP tests are highly and accurately verified.
In an article The Newtonian constant of gravitation—a constant too difficult to measure? , a title which suggests that Quinn believes that Gravity has not been satisfactorily measured, he suggests that it could be that gravity isn't truly universal and that it mainly applies on astrophysical scales:
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsta.2014.0253 ( Archive )
“ What matters then is not the actual value of G itself (give or take a percentage or so) but its uncertainty. The real importance of the accuracy of G is arguably that it can be taken as a measure, in popular culture, of how well we understand our most familiar force: the discrepant results may signify some new physics , or they may demonstrate that we do not understand the metrology of measuring weak forces. Owing to the lack of theoretical understanding of gravity, as alluded to earlier, there is an abundance of respectable theories that predict violations of the inverse square law or violations of the universality of free fall. In fact, a growing view is that G is not truly universal and may depend on matter density on astrophysical scales , for example. A misunderstanding of the metrology of weak force physics may in turn imply that the experimental tests that have established the inverse square law and the universality of free fall thus far are flawed in some subtle fashion. This makes for a potentially exciting situation and perhaps explains the general interest shown in our apparently mundane and painstaking work on G. ”
Whether the science of metrology is misunderstood or the physics of gravity are different than envisioned, the result is the same: The Cavendish Experiment is not a demonstration of gravity.
Due to the mysterious readings and problems, some are now calling gravity part of "Dark Energy."
https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn24180-strength-of-gravity-shifts-and-this-time-its-serious/ ( Archive )
“ An oscillating G could be evidence for a particular theory that relates dark energy to a fifth, hypothetical fundamental force, in addition to the four we know – gravity, electromagnetism, and the two nuclear forces. This force might also cause the strength of gravity to oscillate, says Padilla. “This result is indeed very intriguing." ”
According to physicist George T. Gillies the difficulties in measuring G has been a recurring theme in the study of gravity.
The Newtonian gravitational constant: recent measurements and related studies (1996) ( Archive ) George T. Gillies
Abstract: “ Improvements in our knowledge of the absolute value of the Newtonian gravitational constant, G, have come very slowly over the years. Most other constants of nature are known (and some even predictable) to parts per billion, or parts per million at worst. However, G stands mysteriously alone, its history being that of a quantity which is extremely difficult to measure and which remains virtually isolated from the theoretical structure of the rest of physics. Several attempts aimed at changing this situation are now underway, but the most recent experimental results have once again produced conflicting values of G and, in spite of some progress and much interest, there remains to date no universally accepted way of predicting its absolute value ”
Concluding Remarks - p.212
“ The spread in the values of G obtained by the recent high-precision determinations of it attests to the difficulty of the experiments. Interestingly, the differences in the published results replicates a similar situation that arose almost 140 years ago (Jacobs 1857), and which seems to have repeated itself every few decades since then. As discussed at length in section 4, determinations of G are fraught with difficulty because of the universality of the gravitational force, its weakness compared to the other fundamental interactions and the sensitive nature of the apparatus used to make the measurements. ”
The Newtonian Gravitational Constant: An Index of Measurements (1983) ( Archive ) George T. Gillies
Introduction - p.1
“ If one were to catalog the tools of precision measurement, an unusually high number of the listings would claim as their genesis the precision measurement of the Newtonian Gravitational Constant, herein simply referred to as "G". These tools would include the torsion balance, the optical lever, the quartz fiber, synchronous detection techniques, ultra-high precision rotations and many others. Yet G stands alone as the only fundamental constant currently known to little better than one part in a thousand although there are three measurements claiming accuracies of one part in ten thousand. In parallel with these efforts to measure the absolute value of G, there has also been a wide variety of experiments aimed at linking the gravitational force to the other forces of nature. All such efforts to date have had the singularly unique result of demonstrating that gravity, indeed, stands alone - the last of the great classical mechanisms - in spite of its modernized presentation via general relativity.
Classical gravitational physics has been like this, and foreseeably will continue to be like this. The reason why is that, to this date, no one has succeeded in isolating sufficiently well the gravitational interaction between laboratory masses to the point where other disturbing forces or experimental uncertainties do not dominate the measurement, at least at levels above those at which other phenomena might be expected to occur. ”
As suggested by the references above; until physics is able to isolate the gravitational interaction between laboratory masses to the point where other disturbing forces do not dominate the measurement, the Cavendish Experiment should be regarded for what it is: An inconsistent experiment which is admittedly disturbed and dominated by unknown or unmitigated effects, and which might or might not include "gravity" in the results seen.
A found attraction somewhere around the force equivalent of the weight of a few cells is considered by popular thought to be an impeachable proof for gravity and the universal attraction of mass. Accordingly, anything which seems to support it does support it, no matter how imprecise, no matter how many other effects may be dominating the results of the experiment, and the absurdity of equivocating the detection of such a slight effect to one cause above any other possibility in nature is put out of the mind and ignored entirely. It is through such inherent fallacy that one hypothesis is built upon another. Deductions and conclusions are given, but the foundations remain essentially undemonstrated. It is deemed sufficient to observe and interpret rather than to prove and demonstrate.
One attempted justification of the issues with the Cavendish Experiment is to point out that the deviation in the experiment is "small". Specifically, the Forbes article above references discrepancies on a 0.15% level.
“ As you might expect, the values got better and better through time, with the uncertainties dropping from 0.1% to 0.04% all the way down to just 0.012% in the late 1990s, owing mostly to the work of Barry Taylor at NIST...
This is why it was such a shock, in 1998, when a very careful team got a result that differed by a spectacular 0.15% from the previous results, when the errors on those earlier results were claimed to be more than a factor of ten below that difference....Multiple teams, using different methods, were getting values for G that conflicted with each other at the 0.15% level, more than ten times the previously reported uncertainties. ”
It is argued that this 0.15% deviation is small, and so the problems with the Cavendish Experiment should be ignored on that basis.
However, this argument is insufficient. The range of deviations dominates the result. As these "small" effects dominate the still smaller effect of gravity that should be measured by the equipment, causing deviations of over 10 times the expected uncertainties, it is still questionable whether the experiment is measuring gravity. In the Futurism article astrophysicist Colin Robson compares the issues with the Cavendish Experiment to an analogy [1] of trying to measure the weight of a feather on a crude pair of scales in a slight breeze. This "small" effect from the slight breeze dominates the smaller effect of the feather's weight. Under such a situation if the view of the feather was obscured from observers, and only the readings on the scale were seen, varying because of the breeze, it would be reasonable to question whether the feather was there at all. Likewise, any situation which dominates the effect of gravity must necessarily call the existence of gravity into question.
A dominating noise invalidates the detection of a smaller effect. The range of results is over ten fold the determined uncertainties of the equipment. One cannot merely assume that the experiment is detecting a number of admittedly stronger effects to cause the inconsistent results, but maintain that "gravity is in there somewhere."
Another common approach to justifying the results of the Cavendish Experiment is to assert that we need only find the closest mean, median, or mode of the results, and to declare that this is the value of 'gravity'. Yet, minimal introspection on this approach will show that finding a statistical average value of the effects which are dominating the experiment would tell us only what the average is for the dominating effects, and not about 'gravity'.
As a proof by contradiction, similar experiments which have attempted measure gravity at larger scales than the shorter ranges of the Cavendish Experiment have been unable to detect gravitational influence. There is a reason for why the Cavendish Experiment is cited as one of the very few proofs of gravity. It is typically neglected mention in the classroom that a great amount of effort has gone into searching for gravitational variations from either the earth or external bodies, with negative results. See: Variations in Gravity
Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics

Gravimetry and Gravity gradiometry is a field of science which supposedly measures the strength of the earth's gravitational field. In these discussions Gravimetry is often used as evidence that the gravitational field of the earth varies with latitude and by location.
It has been found that Gravimetry is not directly measuring gravity at all. The Gravimeter devices have been described by professionals in that field as long-period seismometers that are measuring small "jerks" in the background seismic noise and interpreting it as variations in gravity. [1] The theory behind gravimetry is that it is detecting tiny density variations in the noise which are called "gravity waves" and "infragravity waves" [2] Gravimeters are, in truth, seismometers. Seismometer devices have been described as having a "gravimeter mode." [3] Seismometers can double-purpose as gravimeters, and can detect the "gravity tides". Gravimeters are often similarly double-purposed as seismometers to detect earthquakes thousands of miles away. [4]
Perhaps most illustrative, gravitational anomalies on gravity maps are indistinguishable from the seismic zones. [5] There are also several items which do not make sense with the gravity anomalies if they were actually a measurement of mass. Mountains and continents are seen to dampen gravity readings rather than to increase them. [6]
Further, the differences by latitude and altitude in the gravimetric end product data are seen to be artificial corrections that are added or subtracted to the data and reference model, rather than information that is from the measurements. Operators are told to make a correction for latitude, essentially inputting the variations. Even absolute gravimeters  determine local gravity from an equation which uses the gravitational accelerations of the equator and poles with the device latitude. [7]
The theory behind the field of Gravimetry is that the masses in the subsurface are creating tiny variations or jerks, presumed to be due to "gravity", that are measured by the devices in a unit of measurement called uGal or mGal. We read a description of Gravity Gradiometry on Wikipedia:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravity_gradiometry ( Archive )
“ Gravity gradiometry is the study and measurement of variations in the acceleration due to gravity. The gravity gradient is the spatial rate of change of gravitational acceleration.
Gravity gradiometry is used by oil and mineral prospectors to measure the density of the subsurface, effectively by measuring the rate of change of gravitational acceleration (or jerk) due to underlying rock properties . From this information it is possible to build a picture of subsurface anomalies which can then be used to more accurately target oil, gas and mineral deposits. It is also used to image water column density, when locating submerged objects, or determining water depth (bathymetry). Physical scientists use gravimeters to determine the exact size and shape of the earth and they contribute to the gravity compensations applied to inertial navigation systems. ”
A quote from the Enhanced Geothermal Innovative Network for Europe ( Archive ) explains:
“ Gravimetry
As the gravitational field of  the earth depends on the density of the rocks, variations of the gravitational field (Bouguer anomalies) observed at  the surface or in a borehole are due to density changes in the subsurface , which can be interpreted in terms of changes in the composition and/or geometry of the geological layers. ”
From Gravity surveying: a brief introduction ( Archive ) we read:
“ Everything is gravitationally attracted to everything else. And the gravitational attraction of an object is proportional to its mass. So if the rocks below you at a given place are denser, then the gravity there will be slightly larger. The changes in gravity from place to place are small: gravity, g, at the Earth’s surface is about 9.81ms −2 , but the local variations are a tiny fraction of this ; often we are measuring differences of 10 −6 ms −2 . ”
In The Gravity Method ( Archive ), its author Dr. Nicolas O. Mariita tells us:
“ The success of the gravity method depends on the different earth materials having different bulk densities (mass) that produce variations in the measured gravitational field. These variations can then be  interpreted  by  a  variety  of analytical and computers methods to determine the depth, geometry and density that causes the gravity field variations. ”
The Global CCS Institute ( Archive ) says:
“ Gravimetry consists of studying the anomalies of the gravity field due to density variations underground. ”
A New Mexico Tech Exploration Geophysics II course says ( Archive ):
“ Gravimeters do not measure the absolute value of gravity, but rather relative changes in gravity. The dial reading for each measurement needs to be multiplied by the instrumental dial constant to provide the relative gravity in mGals. In order to interprete the gravity measurements in terms of the geology of the survey area, various corrections need to be applied to the data. These include correcting for instrumental drift, tides and elevation (which includes the free-air correction and Bouguer correction). The gravity anomaly is determined by taking the difference between the observed measurements and the theoretically calculated value (GRS67) for that location. Once the corrections have been applied and the gravity anomaly determined, the data can now be interpreted in terms of subsurface properties. ”
Comparative study of superconducting gravimeters and broadband seismometers STS-1/Z in seismic and subseismic frequency bands ( Archive )
“ Superconducting gravimeters and broadband seismometers (vertical component) both measure gravity , but whereas the former are most sensitive to very long period signals (gravity tides with periods longer than 6h), the latter are designed for recording the seismic band (elastic normal modes with periods shorter than 1h) ”
Diagram from p. 212:

The paper says that when comparing Gravimeters to the Seismometers, the gravity spectra is nearly identical:
“ The gravity spectra of the BFO station show that the seismometer STS-1/Z and the superconducting gravimeter are almost equivalent (see also Ritcher et al. (1995)). Therefore we believe that the high noise level shown by the superconducting gravimeter in Strasbourg is probably due to site effects rather than to the instrument itself: a possible reason is that Station J9 is located on a thick layer of sediments (about 3000m) in the Rhine Graben which amplifies noise at long periods. ”
Further, the above paper states that seismometers are also able to detect the tides -- p.204, second paragraph:
“ A first attempt to use broadband seismometers outside their traditional spectral range was made by Pillet et al. (1994), and they showed that the STS-1 is able to receive strong tidal signals around diurnal frequencies. ”
The STS-1 is a seismometer (see caption text in last diagram).
It is mentioned that the "gravity tides" are found in the subseismic band:
“ Two different frequency bands are considered: the seismic band (frequencies between 0.2. and 1.667 mHz), for the study of normal modes after the Bolivian earthquake of 9 June 1994, and the subseismic band (frequencies lower than 0.2 mHz), including the study of gravity tides . ”
A definition of "subseismic band" ( Archive ):
“ "subseismic band" (i.e. frequency lower than 0.03mHz) that has very strong background noise; ”
Is a study of subseismic activity a study of gravity?
From https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravimeter ( Archive ) we read:
“ Many broadband, three axis, seismometers in common use are sensitive enough to track the sun and moon. When operated to report acceleration, they are useful gravimeters . Because they have three axes, it is possible to solve for their position and orientation, by either tracking the arrival time and pattern of seismic waves from earthquakes, or by referencing them to the sun and moon tidal gravity.
Recently, the SGs, and broadband three axis seismometers operated in gravimeter mode , have begun to detect and characterize the small gravity signals from earthquakes. ”
The reader might ask, if gravimeters are entirely different devices than seismometers, how could seismometers have a "gravimeter mode"?
This inventor describes gravimeters as follows:
http://www.njsas.org/projects/tidal_forces/magnetic_gravimeter/baker/ ( Archive )
“ A seismometer usually looks for the smallest possible acceleration changes. Since gravity is physically the same as acceleration, gravimeters are merely versions of seismometers with an infinitely long period response . ”
From p.2 of a paper on seafloor measurements ( Archive ) from the Journal of Geophysical Research we see:
“ We have collected vertical compliance data using a gravimeter (long-period seismometer) and a differential pressure gauge ”
On p.4 of The Gravity Method ( Archive ) by Dr. Nicolas O. Mariita we read another reference:
“ An important factor in obtaining useful gravity values in detailed surveys is determining the earth tide effect  as  their  gravitational effects may be greater than the gravity field variations due to the anomalous features being sought. The final aspect of reading a gravity meter concerns seismic activity or cultural movement such as those of vehicles or people. These will disrupt the readings ( the meter is actually a low-frequency seismometer ) and even though the Scintrex meter has an anti-seismic filter (the  La  Coste-Romberg  meters  are  also  mechanically  damped  to lessen  the  effects  of  earthquakes), readings  will  still  be  disrupted. ”
Again, we see that the gravimeter is actually a seismometer, and will be easily disrupted by seismic activity and other noise.
Recall from the above seismometer section that the seismometer was detecting gravity tides on subseismic bands, which was described as:
“ 'subseismic band' (i.e. frequency lower than 0.03mHz) that has very strong background noise ”
This agrees with the 'low-frequency' statement given by Dr. Marrita above. The gravimeter is a low-frequency seismometer, taking data out of those low-frequency bands.
On p.14 from a University of Hawaii lecture ( Archive ) we read:
“ GRAVITY METERS (GRAVIMETERS).
Nearly all gravity surveys use gravimeters to take their data. A gravimeter is identical to a long-period seismometer in most respects, the only difference being that the goal is to measure the force needed to center the mass, which is proportional to g. ”
It is often argued that a gravimeter works by dropping a body and measuring the full acceleration. While some types of gravimeters drop bodies, others do not. Consider how the following gravimeter works:
https://schmidtocean.org/rv-falkor/operations-and-science-systems/gravimeter/ ( Archive )
“ The gravimeter, about the size of a steamer trunk, uses magnetism to suspend an internal metal cylinder, and measures changes in the way gravity pulls on that cylinder . Many people are familiar with the fact that acceleration from gravity—for instance if you jump out of a plane—is 9.8 meters per second squared. Measured in milligals (mGals)—a common research unit for gravity—that’s 980,000. Remarkably, the gravimeter can detect changes as small as 1 mGal—or roughly one millionth of gravity’s total pull. ”
The above device does not contain a falling object. The magnetism suspends the cylinder. The system then measures changes to that cylinder. The article continues:
“ The researchers aren’t interested in that total pull, though ; they’re interested in learning about the seafloor. So they process the data coming in to subtract out all the normal weight of Earth below them, which is relatively constant, as well as the weight due to topography, which they get from the sonar mapping. ”
As directly stated, the interest isn't in the total pull. The designers mainly care about using the device as a seismometer.
From Geophysics From Terrestrial Time‐Variable Gravity Measurements we read about a device that does involve a falling object. The interest is in the tiny noises that affect the mirror in the device while the body is in free fall and disconnected from the Earth:
“ In an absolute gravimeter, a test laser beam bounces off the free‐falling body before being reflected back to the interferometer, where the test beam interferes with a reference one. While the dropped mass is completely isolated from the Earth's vibrations during its fall, anthropogenic and natural microseismic noises continuously modify the position of the reference mirror of the interferometer. Even in the absence of an earthquake, the displacements of the Earth's surface are persistent and location and season dependent, reaching up to a few micrometers close to the coast (Kedar et al., 2008), while one should measure the free‐fall distance at the 1 nm precision level in order to achieve a precision on gravity of 10 nm/s^2. In the first white‐light gravimeter, the measurements of gravity were corrected by using the records from a 1 s period seismometer. Early in the 1980s, Rinker (1983) developed the so‐called Super Spring, that is, a modified seismometer providing an inertial reference system at periods shorter than about 1 min—the suspended mass of a seismometer provides an inertial reference frame, independent from the motions of the Earth, at periods shorter than the resonance frequency (Aki & Richards, 2002). The challenge consisted in producing a suspension device of which the free period is about 1 min, that is, longer than the periods ranging 5–20 s, where microseism is the strongest. ”
From the abstract of a paper titled Monitoring earthquakes with gravity meters ( Archive ) we read:
“ Seismic waves from a magnitude 8.3 earthquake in Japan were consistently recorded by five nearly identical gPhone gravity meters in Colorado. Good correlation was also found in the response of two different types of gravity meters and a standard seismometer in Walferdange, Luxembourg to an earthquake of magnitude 8.2 in Japan, indicating that all of them were capable of measuring the surface waves reliably. The gravity meters, however, recorded 11 separate arrivals of Raleigh waves, while the seismometer only one. Thus the gravity meters may be useful for obtaining new information in the study of seismic velocities, attenuation and dispersion. ”
The ending two sentences of that abstract even imply that gravity meters may be superior for measuring seismic elements.
From the study we see several seismic reading comparisons between gravimeters (gPhone) and seismometers (STS-2):


Pre-seismic gravity anomalies before Linkou Ms 6.4 earthquake by continuous gravity observation of Crustal Movement Observation Network of China ( Archive )
The reader may ponder why the gravity of the earth would change before an earthquake.
Look at these gravimeter readings from the Onsala Space Observatory's Superconducting Gravimeter ( Archive ) and decide if the readings looks like the output of a seismometer with values above and below zero. Determine which values are the raw readings before a noise reducing filter is applied.
http://holt.oso.chalmers.se/hgs/SCG/daily-residual-plots.html ( Archive )
24 hours of gravity residual, 1-s sampling

“ The gravity residual is computed by subtracting an empirical tide model and subtracting the local air pressure with an empirical coefficient. A linear drift term has also been subtracted. Offsets from zero arise most often due to pressure anomalies that are either greater or smaller than average in their regional extent." ”
A study titled Seafloor Compliance Observed by Long-Period Pressure and Displacement Measurement ( Archive ) uses gravimeters to study the gravity of the ocean. On p.2, para.4 its authors call the gravimeter a long-period seismometer.
“ We have collected vertical compliance data using a gravimeter (long-period seismometer) and a differential pressure gauge ”
On the same page we read about the theory behind the measurements:

We see that the theory behind the measurements involve the theories of "Gravity Waves" and "Infragravity Waves". Wikipedia describes them as:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravity_wave ( Archive )
“ In fluid dynamics, gravity waves are waves generated in a fluid medium or at the interface between two media when the force of gravity or buoyancy tries to restore equilibrium. An example of such an interface is that between the atmosphere and the ocean, which gives rise to wind waves.
A gravity wave results when fluid is displaced from a position of equilibrium. The restoration of the fluid to equilibrium will produce a movement of the fluid back and forth, called a wave orbit.[1] Gravity waves on an air–sea interface of the ocean are called surface gravity waves or surface waves, while gravity waves that are within the body of the water (such as between parts of different densities) are called internal waves. Wind-generated waves on the water surface are examples of gravity waves, as are tsunamis and ocean tides. ”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infragravity_wave ( Archive )
“ Infragravity waves are surface gravity waves with frequencies lower than the wind waves – consisting of both wind sea and swell – thus corresponding with the part of the wave spectrum lower than the frequencies directly generated by forcing through the wind.
Infragravity waves are ocean surface gravity waves generated by ocean waves of shorter periods. The amplitude of infragravity waves is most relevant in shallow water, in particular along coastlines hit by high amplitude and long period wind waves and ocean swells. Wind waves and ocean swells are shorter, with typical dominant periods of 1 to 25 s. In contrast, the dominant period of infragravity waves is typically 80 to 300 s,[1] which is close to the typical periods of tsunamis, with which they share similar propagation properties including very fast celerities in deep water. This distinguishes infragravity waves from normal oceanic gravity waves, which are created by wind acting on the surface of the sea, and are slower than the generating wind. ”
Essentially, the "Gravity Waves" are slight motions and vibrations picked up by the gravimeter (seismometer). A chart is provided, showing the frequencies that the winds and tides appear in:

In line with the previous seismometer section, the tides appear on the low frequency bands.
It is asserted that gravimetry has shown trends at different latitudes, and so this is validation of the idea that it is really measuring "gravity". We find that this assertion is unfounded.
From a university course on gravity surveying we read:
http://www.geol-amu.org/notes/m10-1-4.htm ( Archive )
“ Recall that, if the Earth were an homogeneous ellipsoid, the value of gravity at the surface would be given by:
g = g 0 (1 + k 1 sin 2 ϕ – k 2 sin 2 2ϕ)
The objective of gravity surveys is to look for deviations from this reference value. ”
If the objective of gravity surveys is merely to look for deviations from a round earth reference model with the vibrating gravity theory, then the final computed number in meters per second squared would becomes meaningless for the purpose of discussion. Any modifications to the reference values are constructed on an entirely theoretical basis.
The above page tells us that there is a theoretical model and that the goal of gravity surveys is to modify that model. Further down we see, among the list of corrections to be made, the latitude correction:
“ Latitude correction: The earth's poles are closer to the centre of the equator than is the equator. However, there is more mass under the equator and there is an opposing centrifugal acceleration at the equator. The net effect is that gravity is greater at the poles than the equator.
For values relative to a base station, gravity increases as you move north, so subtract 0.811 sin(2a) mGal/km as you move north from the base station. (where a is latitude). ”
We read that we are subtracting or adding values to the reference model and the data to make the corrections for latitude, which is very different than using the data to determine the latitude. The claim that the final number is meaningful as evidence to showcase any particular point may be fallacious.
Note: The reference 'for values relative to a base station' may imply that this is referring to a relative gravimeter.
On p.9 of Seismic Activity, Gravity, and Magnetic Measurements ( Archive ) by LaGeo  as part of the United Nations University Geothermal Training Program we read:
“ 3.6 Reduction of data
Gravimeters do not give direct measurements of gravity ; rather, a meter reading is taken which is then
multiplied by an instrumental calibration factor to produce a value of observed gravity (known as
gobs). The correction process is known as gravity data reduction or reduction to the geoid. The
various corrections that can be applied are the following. ”
The section goes on to list a number of corrections, including corrections for latitude and elevation, which is not data contained in the measurement readings:
“ Latitude correction (g n ) - Correction subtracted from gobs that accounts for earth's elliptical shape and
rotation. The gravity value that would be observed if the earth were a perfect (no geologic or
topographic complexities) rotating ellipsoid is referred to as the normal gravity.
g n = 978031.85 * (1.0 + 0.005278895 sin 2 (lat) + 0.000023462 sin4(lat)) (mGal) (4)
where lat is latitude ”
“ Free-air corrected gravity (g fa ) - The free-air correction accounts for gravity variations caused by
elevation differences in the observation locations ”
These are artificial corrections which are added or subtracted to the data and reference model. If the earth were really elliptical or rotating, and if the devices were really measuring gravity in full, then these artificial corrections would not be necessary. It is seen that the devices are seismometers and that these corrections are artificially added into the data as modifications.
A common response to some of the references above is to declare that even thought he sources do not specify, the sources must solely be talking about relative gravimeters, and that absolute gravimeters are completely different devices which measures gravity in full. Yet, despite this argument we see that even absolute gravimeters determine local gravity through a model involving the gravitational acceleration of the equator and poles.
Terrain-aided navigation with an atomic gravimeter ( Archive )
Introduction
"The purpose of the paper is to provide a solution for surface or sub-surface navigation by Terrain Matching using an absolute gravimeter ."
On the third page:
III. A METHOD TO MAP THE GRAVITY ANOMALY WITH THE ATOMIC GRAVIMETER

Elsewhere it describes that "Φ is the longitude and λ the latitude. g(Φ, λ) is the modulus of the local gravity acceleration vector"
To determine the local gravity acceleration the device invokes a model involving an equation using gravitational acceleration at the equator and poles with the latitude, and the results are then added to the gravity anomaly (Last line: g(Φ, λ) [Local gravity] = g 0 (λ)[standard gravity accounting for latitude gravity gradient] + g a (Φ, λ) [gravity anomaly]) We see similar equations (sin 2 lat) as in the previous latitude corrections. Why should this be necessary to involve the gravitational accelerations of the equator and poles to determine the local gravity? If an absolute gravimeter is measuring gravity in full then it should measure gravity in full.
Similarly, we read the following about latitude corrections for a precision free-fall device:
Gravity surveys using a mobile atom interferometer ( Archive )
Introduction
“ atomic gravimeters rely on matter-wave interferometry with a freely falling atomic cloud ”
~
Latitude and terrain correction
“ We correct the gravity values collected in the Berkeley Hills for latitude variations using the WGS84 ellipsoidal gravity formula (38) to create latitude-corrected gravity anomalies. ”
~
References and notes
“ 38. Department of Defense World Geodetic System 1984: Its definition and relationships with local geodetic systems (NIMA Technical Report 8350.2, 3rd ed., National Imagery and Mapping Agency, Washington, DC, USA, 1997). ”
We again see a precision free-fall gravimeter which is corrected for latitude.
On p.13 of a paper titled Invited Review Article: Measurements of the Newtonian constant of gravitation, G ( Archive ) we see a summary of the WGS84 ellipsoidal gravity formula:
“ The local acceleration is a sum of the centrifugal acceleration and the gravitational acceleration. At the equator, the local acceleration is reduced by the centrifugal acceleration. This effect is exacerbated by the fact that the figure of the Earth is in response to the centrifugal acceleration an oblate spheroid. Hence the polar radius is smaller than the equatorial radius, increasing the gravitational part of the local acceleration towards the pole. A model describing this normal gravity g 0 approximately, the so-called reference ellipsoid, is WGS84 97 ,

and Φ denotes the latitude. This formula describes the theoretical local acceleration on an equipotential surface at mean sea level. It includes both gravitational and centrifugal potentials. ”
This is a very similar equation to the absolute gravimeter local gravity equation given in a section previous to this [8] (sin 2 lat).
The text around this p.13 quote also strongly indicates that the WGS84 equation for the gravity variations was determined based on the weight change experiments conducted at different latitudes and which affects pendulums and scales. From the sentence immediately prior to the above quote:
“ [In] 1672, Jean Richer noticed on a trip to French Guiana that the oscillation frequency of a seconds pendulum depends on the geographical latitude ”
We hence see that the gravimeters, including absolute gravimeters, are adjusting the output for local gravity based on a latitudinal formula that was determined by a different experiment (Note: This is a determination which may be flawed in interpretation; see Weight Variation by Latitude ). Once again, if the absolute gravimeter is measuring gravity in full, why should equations involving gravity's latitudinal differences of the equator and poles be necessary to determine local gravity?
Compare the gravity anomalies (first image) to a map of the plate boundaries and the earthquake zones (second image):


Compare the gravity anomalies (first image) to a world volcano map (second image):

Compare the gravity anomalies to seismic hazard maps of various locations.



Compare the gravity anomalies to a map of earthquakes with magnitudes of 6.5 and above.

The anomalous deviations of gravity, as detected by the gravimeter, are called Bouguer Anomalies .
Bouguer Anomalies Over The Continents and Oceans ( Archive ) in the Journal of the Geological Society of India tells us that the anomalies are greater over the ocean than over the land, which is contrary to gravity theory:
“ Why, in general, the Bouguer gravity anomalies are negative in continental areas and positive in oceanic areas? Extending the question further, why do the predominant negative and positive anomalies respectively correspond to the mountain peaks and ocean depths? Although the Bouguer gravity data are not brought on to an even datum, there is fairly a good inverse correlation of Bouguer anomalies with height/depth as well as seismic data. This obviously indicates the excess mass reflected as gravity lows and the deficit mass as gravity highs with respect to the geoid/ellipsoid surface. This is in contrast to the theory of the gravity field which is proportional to the excess or deficit mass. Mathematically speaking, the observed anomalies are proportional to the vertical gradient of gravity, indicating excess mass above the geoid as gravity lows and deficit mass below the geoid as gravity highs. If this were true, far reaching implications arise in the understanding of the theory and interpretation of Bouguer anomalies. ”
The anomalies are negative in continental areas and positive in oceanic areas. The anomalies are also negative in the mountains. These anomalies appear to go against the theory that the anomalies are due to the attraction of mass.
On discrepancies, one writer states:
“ On the basis of newtonian gravity, it might be expected that gravitational attraction over continents, and especially mountains, would be higher than over oceans. In reality, the gravity on top of large mountains is less than expected on the basis of their visible mass while over ocean surfaces it is unexpectedly high. To explain this, the concept of isostasy was developed: it was postulated that lowdensity rock exists 30 to 100 km beneath mountains, which buoys them up, while denser rock exists 30 to 100 km beneath the ocean bottom. However, this hypothesis is far from proven. Physicist Maurice Allais commented: ‘There is an excess of gravity over the ocean and a deficiency above the continents. The theory of isostasis provided only a pseudoexplanation of this.’ 15
The standard, simplistic theory of isostasy is contradicted by the fact that in regions of tectonic activity vertical movements often intensify gravity anomalies rather than acting to restore isostatic equilibrium. For example, the Greater Caucasus shows a positive gravity anomaly (usually interpreted to mean it is overloaded with excess mass), yet it is rising rather than subsiding. ”
We find the following depiction of Australia's Complete Bouguer Anomalies and Free Air Anomalies on a University of California Berkeley lecture on gravimetry ( Archive ) p.3, showing that the unfiltered anomalies are negative over continental areas and positive over oceanic areas:

https://www.leibniz-liag.de/en/research/methods/gravimetry-magnetics/bouguer-anomalies.html ( Archive )
“ This map shows the Bouguer anomalies over the whole of Germany and surrounding areas, in a detailed but still clear way.
...The resulting gravity anomalies vary across the mapped area from -170 mGal in the Alps to +40 mGal around the gravity low in the Magdeburg area. ”
The above shows that the anomalies are negative in the Alps of Germany.

It is theorized by isostasy that there are inverse anomalous structures beneath the mountain ranges, which mirrors the topography, giving the low gravity readings:
https://web.archive.org/web/20130529124307/http://earthsci.org/education/teacher/basicgeol/earthq/earthq.html
“ Negative anomalies exist beneath mountain ranges, and mirror the topography and crustal thickness as determined by seismic studies. Thus, the low density continents appear to be floating on higher density mantle. ”

The negative gravity readings at the mountains are conventionally attributed to Isostasy . However, if gravimeters are really seismometers which pick up low frequency seismic waves originating from within the earth then we should expect the bulk mass of a mountain to dilute a seismic wave more so than other areas, creating a negative anomaly.
It should be noted that there is constant background seismic noise, which emanate from the earth. From http://microglacoste.com/gPhoneNoise/gPhoneSeismicNoise.pdf ( Archive ) we read:
“ It is interesting to speculate on the precise origin of the background seismic noise. Haubrich et al ii for example, open their article with the following description of the seismic noise background and the large interest it has generated over the years as well as the intractability of its investigation:
The low‐level background unrest of the earth, called microseisms or earth noise, has puzzled seismologists and other scientists for nearly a century. The problem of its nature and causes has proved particularly unyielding, not, however, for  lack  of  investigation.  A  bibliography  covering  work up  to 1955  [Gutenberg  and  Andrews,  1956] iii lists  over  600  articles on  the  subject;  one  covering  the  years  from  1955  to  1964 [Hjortenberg,  1967] iv lists  566.  Unfortunately,  much  of  this work has advanced the subject but slightly. ”
It should also be noted that seismic waves can become airborne, which could explain the ability of gravimeter devices on airplanes to register the anomalies.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seismic_wave ( Archive )
“ Primary waves (P-waves) are compressional waves that are longitudinal in nature. P waves are pressure waves that travel faster than other waves through the earth to arrive at seismograph stations first, hence the name "Primary". These waves can travel through any type of material, including fluids, and can travel nearly 1.7 times faster than the S waves. In air, they take the form of sound waves, hence they travel at the speed of sound. Typical speeds are 330 m/s in air, 1450 m/s in water and about 5000 m/s in granite. ”
Q. If the gravimeters are picking up background seismic activity, how is it that gravimeters can detect underground oil deposits and other structures? A. If seismic vibrations are originating from deep within the earth and are passing though various substances as they reach the detector on the surface, and those signals change slightly when the detector passes over the underground body, it may be possible to subtract some elements to see others through data analysis, just as how seismographers try to use seismic waves to detect tunnels. See: Phys.org - Detecting tunnels using seismic waves not as simple as it sounds ( Archive )
On analysis of the gravimeter we find its primary purpose is to measure noise and use many software algorithms to interpret and filter the noise. Every part of the device's components—the lasers which measure the motion, the mirrors, the springs which launch the mass up and down the small tube, and all component parts—are all connected in some manner to the earth, and are subject to noise and vibrations.
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-662-03482-8_9 (Archive p.1 p.2 )
“ One of the most serious problems for absolute gravimeters is the vibration disturbances. ”
Below we see an example of gravimetry devices and methods for marine gravimetric surveying:
http://www.iitk.ac.in/nicee/wcee/article/WCEE2012_1237.pdf ( Archive )
An example is given of outputs from VSE, Accelerometer, and Gradiometer devices on a mid-size ship navigating Toyama Bay, Japan:

Following the illustration we find the following:
“ FINDING GRAVITY FROM VERY NOISY DATA
In the previous section, the low-pass filter is used to find the gravity from the noisy data. We can expect
that the variation of gravity consists of components with long period, however the vibration of carrier
with short period. If this expectation is satisfied, the low-pass filter should work well. Actually, analysis
for the first observation on an observation wheel works well, though, not for the other two observations.
The reason is the difference of the amplitude of the noise: it is very difficult to pick up the gravity data
with very small amplitude from very large vibration of the carrier. This must be limitation of simple
filtering technique.
To reduce the vibration of the carrier, we can choose two different approaches. ”
From the above we see that a need to use algorithms and filters to ' find the gravity' from noise. The levels of g are not readily apparent, and must be constructed by subtracting from the noise to ' find gravity' . The above passage states that "We can expect to find the variations of gravity consists of components with long period, however the vibration of the carrier with short periods."
The reader may decide whether the process of subtracting vibrations with one characteristic to reveal other vibrations is truly measuring gravity. Why does "gravity" need to be found?
The Danish vessel Galathea-3 describes its methods for gravimetric surveying:
Galathea-3: A Global Marine Gravity Profile ( Archive )
“ The Galathea-3 navigation data included raw depth records provided by The Danish Hydrological Office. The data transfer was sometimes unstable and the data themselves were often very noisy . A preparation of such data for the Bouguer gravity processing requires a cumbersome data cleaning the removal of the spikes, the smoothing, and often the interpolation ”
We see that the process involves extensive data analysis, filtering, and clean-up from noise — to 'find gravity'.
Airborne gravimetery methods reveal the same:
Improving the Accuracy and Resolution of SINS/DGPS Airborne Gravimetry ( Archive )
“ Because the resulting signal is very noisy (see Sections 2.3.2 to 2.3.4 for details), its derivation is
followed by a filtering step that removes most of the noise by low-pass filtering the data. ”
Again, we see that filtering is necessary to clean up the noise.
Per normal land-based gravimeters, the following paper describes the process of turning a laser signal from an absolute gravimeter into a "variation of gravity":
Ultra-high Precision, Absolute, Earth Gravity Measurements ( Archive )
The paper describes that the fringe signal from the laser beam in an absolute gravimeter is digitized and processed:
“ One of the new features of our setup is that the whole fringe signal (with up to
1.6 million data points) is digitized and processed. In other gravimeters usually
just parts of the fringe signal are used for data processing. Since the duration
of our FB’s fall in the MPG-1 is about 200 ms, the resultant signal reaches a
frequency of up to 6.2 MHz. As an industry standard, a sampling rate of at
least 7 times the measured frequency is suggested. ”
Processing Steps

The fringe signal from the laser must be filtered with software:

The remainder of the document describes how the filtering occurs. All sources, to the best of the author's ability, are given an "uncertainty budget," to which is subtracted from the noise. The uncertainty budgets are estimated ranges to which a phenomenon may be contributing to the noise. All possible phenomena in nature must be considered and precisely defined . Everything from air drag, electrostatic fields, pressure, seismic vibrations, &c.
In the Table of Contents we find a list of items, showing the various elements which are subtracted:
Once all of these items and their theoretical uncertainties are subtracted, we are left with "gravity".
The above pdf mentions that long-term analysis of the gravimeter noise can detect the tides:

The main conclusion from this is that the tides may be related in some manner to vibration or noise that is being processed. No mechanism is presented, or is identifiable, from a long term analysis of noise trends.
Still on the topic of general/land-based gravimetry, we look at the following paper discussing absolute gravimeters:
Comparison of three digital fringe signal processing methods in a ballistic free-fall absolute gravimeter
From the introduction the author states that the input is a noisy fringe signal .
“ The advantages of digitizing the entire fringe signal are as follows: the imperfect electronic components are eliminated; the full information on the quality of the fringe signal is available; a noisy fringe signal is digitally filtered at the pre-processing steps; different numerical algorithms to calculate a g value can be interchangeably applied. ”
The g value must be extracted with various methods. It is not direct and apparent:
“ Usually, the fringe signal is digitized at a sampling rate exceeding its maximum frequency. However, a few methods have demonstrated the possibility to extract a g value from the fringe signal sampled far below the Nyquist criterion (table 1). ”
Multiple methods, functions, to "extract" the gravity value from the "noisy fringe signal."
Not an obvious and apparent method; multiple models are involved:
“ This method has been developed by Niebauer et al [18]. The basic idea is to extract the gravity value directly from the undersampled waveform of the fringe signal given by the non-linear model (1). To find the initial estimates of the model parameters, required in the non-linear leasts quares adjustment, it was proposed to iteratively demodulate the digitized waveform. For this the acquired fringe signal is multiplied by a swept sinusoid, denoted as a complex heterodyne function. This method requires prior knowledge of the sweep parameters. A complex heterodyning is used to reduce the bandwidth of the demodulated signal in order to double the signal-to-noise ratio, compared with a single sideband demodulation [18]. ”
Filtering agreement can be made with other fringe signal processing methods:
“ Up to now, a few comparisons of different fringe signal processing methods have reported an agreement within several parts in 10^9 of g [10, 18] or even larger [12, 16]. ”
These processes are filtering out the noise to find trends. From the conclusion we read:
“ 5. Conclusions
For the first time, a comparison of the three different digital fringe signal processing methods, realized in the same absolute gravimeter, has been completed. The two-sample zerocrossing method, the windowed second-difference method and the method of non-linear least-squares adjustment using the initial parameter estimates, found by the demodulation of the undersampled fringe signal, have been compared in numerical simulations, hardware tests and actual measurements with the MPG-2 absolute gravimeter. Up to now, diversity of the digital fringe signal processing methods in absolute gravimetry was mainly caused by a certain technical restriction: processing of the huge amount of digitized fringe data was limited by the available computing capabilities. Owing to this, several original, though complicated, algorithms have been developed. In contrast, the reported comparison involves the simple and straightforward method to detect all the zero-crossings in a digitized fringe signal. ”
This document was written in 2010. If Gravimetry were really "simple direct measurement of the acceleration," as some have claimed, then the reader might ask, why was it limited by pre-2010 computing capabilities? The answer is that it is not direct at all. It is the many algorithms necessary to interpret the "noisy" fringe signal (even for land-based absolute gravimeters) which needs large amounts of computing power. The process is interpretation of a noisy fringe signal from what we learned earlier was a seismometer.
From the paper:
“ Therefore, a combination of the different methods of fringe signal processing in the same instrument is a useful tool to compose a more complete uncertainty budget. ”
Uncertainty budgets , just as we saw in the previous paper, are subtracted from the noise in the effort to find gravity .
While gravimetry results have a relationship with geographical areas relating to positive anomalies at the seismic zones and negative anomalies on the continents and mountains, the use of gravimetry for reliable detection of underground targets is murkier. Gravimetry must be used alongside other techniques, as gravimetry alone provides poor understanding of the earth.
From a Los Alamos National Laboratory associated geophysics program - https://permalink.lanl.gov/object/tr?what=info:lanl-repo/lareport/LA-UR-17-30673 ( Archive )
From An Introduction to Geophysical Exploration - http://www.science.earthjay.com/instruction/HSU/2016_spring/GEOL_460/lectures/lecture_07/geophysical_expoloration_gravity.pdf ( Archive )
From a Doctoral Thesis, Gravimetry for Geothermal Exploration - https://doc.rero.ch/record/255651/files/00002456.pdf ( Archive )
From a course, Physics in Proportion - https://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/mpeterso/phys103/PhysicsInProportionI.pdf ( Archive )
Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics
Related

Isostasy is a concept in the Geology invoked to explain why the Earth's structures do not behave in accordance to Gravity, which states that greater mass should have greater attraction. It is expected that there should be a greater gravitational attraction from mountains than from hills, plateaus, and oceans, since mountains are more massive; yet 'gravity' readings do not reflect this. The concept of isostasy suggests that below sea level there is a mass deficit beneath the mountains, and is used to explain the disagreement between theory and data.
Louis Hessink is a retired geologist who maintains a science blog called Louis Hissink's Crazy World.
https://www.henrythornton.com/louis-hissink ( Archive )
“ Louis Hissink (MSc, Macquarie University) was a consulting diamond geologist, formerly of John Taylors, Western Mining Corporation Ltd and De Beers. He has worked for other smaller companies in Western Australia and the Northern Territory. ”
On the topic of isostasy, Louis Hessnik tells us:
Gravity and Isostasy by Louis Hissink
“ Gravitational theory is firmly entrenched as dogma and is unchallengeable and punishable by excommunication and if the heresy great enough, by permanent expulsion from polite society.  It is thus similar to religion in that as a basic premise it cannot be challenged.
So what about isostasy, a theory developed from the observation that surveying plumb-bobs were not attracted by an adjacent mountain? Or that they were not deflected as much as expected.  This observation is similar to the laboratory Cavendish experiment to determine big G, the gravitational constant, where bodies have the attractive force measured in the horizontal plane.  Herein lies the problem and the manner of thinking adopted when anomalous results are observed.
The reaction to the lack off deflection of the plumb-bob from vertical was to assume that the adjacent mountain had a mass shortfall, rather than question the theory that matter attracts matter.  Clearly the lack of attraction observed would lead to one questioning the principle, and not the data, but no, it is the data which are erroneous, and not the principle of gravitation.
This manner of thinking is simply the religious mind at work, for religious minds cannot contradict received authority, here the belief that come what may, matter always attracts matter.  This attitude was driven home when I presented the anomalous downhole survey data to the consulting geophysicists, who opined that if the readings are true, then there had to be a gravitating mass above the drill hole and since this is not observed, which is correct, then the data have to be in error, and an instrument malfunction the cause of the anomalous data preented in Gravity Update previously.  It never occurred to them that maybe the theory is the problem.
Most scientists hold one or other religious beliefs, and the manner in which they think thus determines how they interpret scientific observations, especially observations that cannot be easily tested in a laboratory.  Minds dominated by a belief system inculcated by education, will tend to only see what the believe system asserts, here that matter attracts matter, and hence if the data do not confirm the theory, or belief, then the data have to be in error. This led to the idea of mountain ranges, or some of them, having deep low density roots into the upper mantle, and the development of Plate Tectonics theory. Except that plates with mountains on them with interpreted under-slab keels should not be able to move, but this inconsistency in the theory seems never a problem, and readily explained as a collision effect between two converging tectonic plates.
Because of this manner of thinking, which leads to the illogical scenario of low density rocks floating in a more dense substrate, ice caps are believed to depress the crust underneath them, and when the ice melts, the crust re-adjusts by expanding upwards. Proof of this is the crustal emergence around the Baltic sea due to the melting of the earlier Pleistocene ice age when an ice cap is postulated to have existed in this part of Europe, and also in Canada where crustal uplift is also observed. But just how a rock of density 1 Kg/M^3 can sink into crust of density 2.7Kg/M^3 is explained by the principle of isostasy.  This assertion is simply crazy – logical but crazy and came about from misinterpeting the earlier surveying data where the plumbline did not deflect as expected from calculations compensating for the mass of the adjacent mountain.
In both cases, the non-deflecting plumb-line and the anomlous downhole survey data, the mainstream reaction to the discordant data was to reject the data and confirm the supremacy of the belief in gravitation. But if the theory of gravity is wrong, then a great lot of theory and assumptions become, if not moot, just plain wrong. Retrocalculation of planetary orbits becomes problematical, gravitational accretion becomes a nonsense leading to a rather drastic paradigm shift in the physical sciences. It is tantamount to questioning our cultural world-view, that of the Abrahamic Religions, and that could be a most dangerous entreprise.
One challenge to this world view is being mounted by Tim Cullen at the Malaga Bay Blog, and of course this one has been politically incorrect for a long time.  It is an intellectual battle between the Oriental and Occidental world-views, that of a cyclical orientalism and a linear occidentalism.
Update: I now wonder if Gravity has replaced God as the prime  mover of the Universe. Both are words starting with a capital G. ”
From an article titled Gravity Anomaly Louis Hissnik states:
“ I think you will find that we may not understand gravity very well. There are many things we don’t understand, it seems. ”
On discrepancies, one writer says :
“ On the basis of newtonian gravity, it might be expected that gravitational attraction over continents, and especially mountains, would be higher than over oceans. In reality, the gravity on top of large mountains is less than expected on the basis of their visible mass while over ocean surfaces it is unexpectedly high. To explain this, the concept of isostasy was developed: it was postulated that lowdensity rock exists 30 to 100 km beneath mountains, which buoys them up, while denser rock exists 30 to 100 km beneath the ocean bottom. However, this hypothesis is far from proven. Physicist Maurice Allais commented: "There is an excess of gravity over the ocean and a deficiency above the continents. The theory of isostasis provided only a pseudoexplanation of this." 15
The standard, simplistic theory of isostasy is contradicted by the fact that in regions of tectonic activity vertical movements often intensify gravity anomalies rather than acting to restore isostatic equilibrium. For example, the Greater Caucasus shows a positive gravity anomaly (usually interpreted to mean it is overloaded with excess mass), yet it is rising rather than subsiding. ”
Bouguer Anomalies Over The Continents and Oceans ( Archive ) in the Journal of the Geological Society of India tells us that the anomalies are  greater in the ocean than over the land, which is contrary to gravity theory:
“ Why, in general, the Bouguer gravity anomalies are negative in continental areas and positive in oceanic areas? Extending the question further, why do the predominant negative and positive anomalies respectively correspond to the mountain peaks and ocean depths? Although the Bouguer gravity data are not brought on to an even datum, there is fairly a good inverse correlation of Bouguer anomalies with height/depth as well as seismic data. This obviously indicates the excess mass reflected as gravity lows and the deficit mass as gravity highs with respect to the geoid/ellipsoid surface. This is in contrast to the theory of the gravity field which is proportional to the excess or deficit mass. Mathematically speaking, the observed anomalies are proportional to the vertical gradient of gravity, indicating excess mass above the geoid as gravity lows and deficit mass below the geoid as gravity highs. If this were true, far reaching implications arise in the understanding of the theory and interpretation of Bouguer anomalies. ”
According to the theory of isostasy, there exists inverse anomalous structures beneath the mountain ranges, which mirrors the topography, explaining why the gravity anomalies are negative on the mountains.
https://web.archive.org/web/20130529124307/http://earthsci.org/education/teacher/basicgeol/earthq/earthq.html
“ Negative anomalies exist beneath mountain ranges, and mirror the topography and crustal thickness as determined by seismic studies. Thus, the low density continents appear to be floating on higher density mantle. ”

https://www.leibniz-liag.de/en/research/methods/gravimetry-magnetics/bouguer-anomalies.html ( Archive )
“ This map shows the Bouguer anomalies over the whole of Germany and surrounding areas, in a detailed but still clear way.
...The resulting gravity anomalies vary across the mapped area from -170 mGal in the Alps to +40 mGal around the gravity low in the Magdeburg area. ”
The above shows that the anomalies are negative in the Alps of Germany.
One alternative explanation as to why the gravity readings appear to be opposite from expected may be related to the the gravity measuring device being used and the nature of what the Gravimeter device is actually detecting. In the article Gravimetry the gravimeter is described by contemporary sources to be a seismometer which does not detect gravity directly, but is instead detecting the alleged density variations caused by gravity in the subseismic band. It is suggested in the article that rather than gravity-induced density variations, the device is measuring background subseismic activity from within the Earth, which is why the highest gravity anomalies are correlated with the seismic zones. If this were true, it should be a natural expectation that mountains and continental masses would act to dampen the subseismic waves which emanate up from the Earth, producing negative readings in mountainous areas as compared to other areas.
Flat Earth Gravity Topics
Round Earth Gravity Topics

Celestial Gravitation is a part of some Flat Earth models which involve an attraction by all objects of mass on earth to the heavenly bodies. This is not the same as Gravity , since Celestial Gravitation does not imply an attraction between objects of mass on Earth. Celestial Gravitation accounts for tides and other gravimetric anomalies across the Earth's plane.